FIFTH EDITION

Precalculus
A Right Triangle Approach

J. S. Ratti
University of South Florida

Marcus McWaters
University of South Florida

Lesław A. Skrzypek
University of South Florida

Jessica Bernards
Portland Community College

Wendy Fresh
Portland Community College

Content Development: Eric Gregg
Content Management: Brian Fisher, Jonathan Krebs, Jeff Weidenaar
Content Production: Tamela Ambush, Nicholas Sweeny
Product Management: Jessica Darczuk
Product Marketing: Stacey Sveum, Jessica Szewczyk
Rights and Permissions: Anjali Singh
Please contact https://support.pearson.com/getsupport/s/ with any queries on this content
Cover Image: Angelo Cavalli/Stone/Getty Images; Gashgeron/Shutterstock;\KRIACHKO
OLEKSII/Shutterstock; Vladimirkarp/Shutterstock
Microsoft and/or its respective suppliers make no representations about the suitability of the
information contained in the documents and related graphics published as part of the services for
any purpose. All such documents and related graphics are provided “as is” without warranty of
any kind. Microsoft and/or its respective suppliers hereby disclaim all warranties and conditions with regard to this information, including all warranties and conditions of merchantability,
whether express, implied or statutory, fitness for a particular purpose, title and non-infringement.
In no event shall Microsoft and/or its respective suppliers be liable for any special, indirect or
consequential damages or any damages whatsoever resulting from loss of use, data or profits,
whether in an action of contract, negligence or other tortious action, arising out of or in connection with the use or performance of information available from the services.
The documents and related graphics contained herein could include technical inaccuracies or
typographical errors. Changes are periodically added to the information herein. Microsoft and/
or its respective suppliers may make improvements and/or changes in the product(s) and/or the
program(s) described herein at any time. Partial screen shots may be viewed in full within the
software version specified.
Microsoft® and Windows® are registered trademarks of the Microsoft Corporation in the U.S.A.
and other countries. This book is not sponsored or endorsed by or affiliated with the Microsoft
Corporation.
Copyright © 2023, 2019, 2015 by Pearson Education, Inc. or its affiliates, 221 River Street,
Hoboken, NJ 07030. All Rights Reserved. Manufactured in the United States of America. This
publication is protected by copyright, and permission should be obtained from the publisher
prior to any prohibited reproduction, storage in a retrieval system, or transmission in any form or
by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise. For information
regarding permissions, request forms, and the appropriate contacts within the Pearson Education
Global Rights and Permissions department, please visit www.pearsoned.com/permissions/.
Acknowledgments of third-party content appear on page C-1, which constitutes an extension of
this copyright page.
PEARSON and MYLAB are exclusive trademarks owned by Pearson Education, Inc. or its affiliates in the U.S. and/or other countries.
Unless otherwise indicated herein, any third-party trademarks, logos, or icons that may appear in
this work are the property of their respective owners, and any references to third-party trademarks, logos, icons, or other trade dress are for demonstrative or descriptive purposes only. Such
references are not intended to imply any sponsorship, endorsement, authorization, or promotion
of Pearson’s products by the owners of such marks, or any relationship between the owner and
Pearson Education, Inc., or its affiliates, authors, licensees, or distributors.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Library of Congress Control Number: 2021949815

ScoutAutomatedPrintCode

Rental
ISBN-10: 0-13-751935-4
ISBN-13: 978-0-13-751935-4

Foreword
We’re pleased to present the fifth edition of Precalculus: A Right Triangle Approach. Our experience in teaching this material has been exceptionally rewarding. Because students are accustomed
to information being delivered by electronic media, the introduction of MyLab™ Math into our
courses was, and remains, seamless. With the addition of Jessica Bernards and Wendy Fresh to the
author team, the MyLab course has been given a fresh redesign that aligns with the Ratti philosophy. You will now find author created videos over every objective as well as author created assignments, quizzes, and exams. Additionally, we have included interactive figures in both the print and
electronic version of the text that will allow students to get a hands on exploration of the topics.
Today’s precalculus students and instructors face many challenges. Students arrive with various levels of comprehension from their previous courses. Instead of really learning the concepts
presented, students often resort to memorization to pass the course. As a result, a course needs to
establish a common starting point for students and engage them in becoming active learners,
without sacrificing the solid mathematics essential for conceptual understanding. Instructors in
this course must take on the task of providing students with an understanding of precalculus, preparing them for the next step, and ensuring that they find mathematics useful and interesting. Our
efforts in this direction have been aided considerably by the many suggestions we have received
from users of the previous editions of this text.
Mathematics owes it current identity to contributions from diverse cultures across the world and
throughout the ages. In this text we provide references to significant improvements and achievements in mathematics and related areas from sources both ancient and modern. We place a strong
emphasis on both concept development and real-life applications. Topics such as functions, graphing, the difference quotient, and limiting processes provide thorough preparation for the study of
calculus and will improve students’ comprehension of algebra. Just-in-time review throughout the
text ensures that all students are brought to the same level before being introduced to new concepts.
Numerous applications motivate students to apply the concepts and skills they learn in precalculus
to other courses, including the physical and biological sciences, engineering, and economics, and to
on-the-job and everyday problem solving. Students are given ample opportunities in this course to
think about important mathematical ideas and to practice and apply algebraic skills.
Throughout the text, we emphasize why the material being covered is important and how it can
be applied. By thoroughly developing mathematical concepts with clearly defined terminology, students see the “why” behind those concepts, paving the way for a deeper understanding, better retention, less reliance on rote memorization, and ultimately more success. The level of exposition was
selected so that the material is accessible to students and provides them with an opportunity to grow.
It is our hope that once you have read through our text, you will see that we were able to
fulfill the initial goals of writing for today’s students and for you, the instructor.

Marcus McWaters

Lesław Skrzypek

Jessica Bernards

Wendy Fresh

J. S. Ratti

iii

Contents
Foreword iii
Preface xiii
Pearson’s Commitment to Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion xx
Dedication xxi

P

Basic Concepts of Algebra
P.1

1

The Real Numbers and Their Properties

2

Classifying Numbers ■ Equality of Numbers ■ Classifying Sets of Numbers ■
Rational Numbers ■ Irrational Numbers ■ Integer Exponents ■ The
Real Number Line ■ Inequalities ■ Sets ■ Definition of Union and
Intersection ■ Intervals ■ Absolute Value ■ Distance Between Two Points
on a Real Number Line ■ Order of Operations ■ Properties of the Real
Numbers ■ Subtraction and Division of Real Numbers ■ Algebraic Expressions

P.2

Integer Exponents and Scientific Notation

19

Integer Exponents ■ Rules of Exponents ■ Simplifying Exponential
Expressions ■ Scientific Notation

P.3

Polynomials 29
Polynomial Vocabulary ■ Adding and Subtracting Polynomials ■ Multiplying
Polynomials ■ Special Products ■ Squaring a Binomial Sum or Difference ■
The Product of the Sum and Difference of Terms

P.4

Factoring Polynomials 39
The Greatest Common Monomial Factor ■ Factoring Out a Monomial ■ Factoring
Trinomials of the Form x 2 + Bx + C ■ Factoring Formulas ■ Perfect-Square
Trinomials ■ Difference of Squares ■ Difference and Sum of Cubes ■ Factoring by
Grouping ■ Factoring Trinomials of the Form Ax 2 + Bx + C

P.5

Rational Expressions

49

Rational Expressions ■ Lowest Terms for a Rational Expression ■ Multiplication
and Division of Rational Expressions ■ Addition and Subtraction of Rational
Expressions ■ Complex Fractions

P.6

Rational Exponents and Radicals

60

Square Roots ■ Simplifying Square Roots ■ Other Roots ■ Like
Radicals ■ Radicals with Different Indexes ■ Rationalizing Radical
Expressions ■ Conjugates ■ Rational Exponents

Chapter P Review and Tests, 73
Practice Test, 78

iv

Review Exercises, 76

Contents

1

Equations and Inequalities
1.1

v

79

Linear Equations in One Variable

80

Definitions ■ Identities, Conditional Equations, and Inconsistent Equations ■
Equivalent Equations ■ Solving Linear Equations in One Variable ■ Formulas

1.2

Applications of Linear Equations: Modeling

90

Solving Applied Problems ■ Geometry ■ Finance ■ Uniform Motion ■ Work
Rate ■ Mixtures

1.3

Quadratic Equations

102

Factoring Method ■ The Square Root Method ■ Completing the Square ■ The
Quadratic Formula ■ The Discriminant ■ Applications ■ Golden Rectangle

1.4	Complex Numbers: Quadratic Equations with Complex
Solutions 117
Complex Numbers ■ Addition and Subtraction ■ Multiplying Complex
Numbers ■ Complex Conjugates and Division ■ Quadratic Equations with
Complex Solutions ■ The Discriminant

1.5

Solving Other Types of Equations 127
Solving Equations by Factoring ■ Rational Equations ■ Equations Involving Radicals ■
Equations with Rational Exponents ■ Equations That Are Quadratic in Form

1.6

Inequalities 141
Inequalities ■ Linear Inequalities ■ Combining Two Inequalities ■ Using Test Points
to Solve Inequalities

1.7

Equations and Inequalities Involving Absolute Value

154

Equations Involving Absolute Value ■ Inequalities Involving Absolute Value

Key Ideas At a Glance, 162 Chapter 1 Review and Tests, 163
Review Exercises, 166 Practice Test A*, 168

2

Graphs and Functions
2.1

169

The Coordinate Plane

170

The Coordinate Plane ■ Scales on a Graphing Utility ■ Distance
Formula ■ Midpoint Formula

2.2

Graphs of Equations

179

Graph of an Equation ■ Intercepts ■ Symmetry ■ Circles ■ Semicircles

2.3

Lines 192
Slope of a Line ■ Point–Slope Form ■ Slope–Intercept Form ■ Equations of
Horizontal and Vertical Lines ■ General Form of the Equation of a Line ■ Parallel
and Perpendicular Lines ■ Modeling Data Using Linear Regression

*Practice Test B can be found in the eText.

vi

Contents

2.4

Functions

209

Functions ■ Function Notation ■ Representations of Functions ■ The Domain of a
Function ■ The Range of a Function ■ Graphs of Functions ■ Function Information
from Its Graph ■ Building Functions ■ Functions in Economics

2.5

Properties of Functions

229

Increasing and Decreasing Functions ■ Relative Maximum and Minimum
Values ■ Even–Odd Functions and Symmetry ■ Average Rate of Change

2.6

A Library of Functions

243

Linear Functions ■ Square Root and Cube Root Functions ■ Piecewise
Functions ■ Graphing Piecewise Functions ■ Basic Functions

2.7

Transformations of Functions

257

Transformations ■ Vertical and Horizontal Shifts ■ Reflections ■ Stretching or
Compressing ■ Multiple Transformations in Sequence

2.8

Combining Functions; Composite Functions

274

Combining Functions ■ Composition of Functions ■ Domain of Composite
Functions ■ Decomposition of a Function ■ Applications of Composite Functions

2.9

Inverse Functions 287
Inverses ■ Finding the Inverse Function ■ Finding the Range of a One-to-One
Function ■ Applications

Key Ideas At a Glance, 300 Chapter 2 Review and Tests, 301
Review Exercises, 305 Practice Test A*, 308 Cumulative Review
Exercises Chapters P–2, 309

3

Polynomial and Rational Functions
3.1

Quadratic Functions

310

311

Quadratic Functions ■ Standard Form of a Quadratic Function ■ Graphing a
Quadratic Function f ( x ) = ax 2 + bx + c ■ Applications

3.2

Polynomial Functions

325

Polynomial Functions ■ Power Functions ■ End Behavior of Polynomial
Functions ■ Zeros of a Function ■ Zeros and Turning Points ■ Graphing a
Polynomial Function

3.3

Dividing Polynomials

345

The Division Algorithm ■ Synthetic Division ■ The Remainder and Factor Theorems

3.4

The Real Zeros of a Polynomial Function

356

Real Zeros of a Polynomial Function ■ Rational Zeros Theorem ■ Descartes’s
Rule of Signs ■ Bounds on the Real Zeros ■ Find the Real Zeros of a Polynomial
Function

3.5

The Complex Zeros of a Polynomial Function
Conjugate Pairs Theorem

367

Contents

3.6

Rational Functions

vii

375

1■
x
Graphing Rational Functions ■ Oblique Asymptotes ■ Graph of a Revenue Curve
Rational Functions ■ Vertical and Horizontal Asymptotes ■ Translations of f ( x ) =

3.7

Variation 393
Direct Variation ■ Inverse Variation ■ Joint and Combined Variation

Key Ideas At a Glance, 403 Chapter 3 Review and Tests, 404
Review Exercises, 407 Practice Test A*, 409 Cumulative Review
Exercises Chapters P–3, 410

4

Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
4.1

Exponential Functions

411

412

Exponential Functions ■ Evaluate Exponential Functions ■ Graphing Exponential
Functions ■ Transformations on Exponential Functions ■ Simple Interest ■ Compound
Interest ■ Continuous Compound Interest Formula ■ The Natural Exponential
Function ■ Exponential Growth and Decay

4.2

Logarithmic Functions

432

Logarithmic Functions ■ Evaluating Logarithms ■ Basic Properties of Logarithms ■
Domains of Logarithmic Functions ■ Graphs of Logarithmic Functions ■ Common
Logarithm ■ Natural Logarithm ■ Investments ■ Newton’s Law of Cooling

4.3

Rules of Logarithms

449

Rules of Logarithms ■ Number of Digits ■ Change of Base ■ Growth and
Decay ■ Half-Life ■ Radiocarbon Dating

4.4

Exponential and Logarithmic Equations and Inequalities

462

Solving Exponential Equations ■ Applications of Exponential Equations ■
Solving Logarithmic Equations ■ Logarithmic and Exponential Inequalities

4.5

Logarithmic Scales; Modeling

475

pH Scale ■ Earthquake Intensity ■ Loudness of Sound ■ Musical Pitch ■
Star Brightness ■ Modeling

Key Ideas At a Glance, 491 Chapter 4 Review and Tests, 492
Review Exercises, 494 Practice Test A*, 497 Cumulative Review
Exercises Chapters P–4, 498

5

Trigonometric Functions
5.1

Angles and Their Measure

499
500

Angles ■ Angle Measure ■ Degree Measure ■ Radian Measure ■ Relationship
Between Degrees and Radians ■ Coterminal Angles ■ Complements and
Supplements ■ Length of an Arc of a Circle ■ Area of a Sector ■ Linear and
Angular Speed
*Practice Test B can be found in the eText.

viii

Contents

5.2

Right-Triangle Trigonometry

514

Trigonometric Ratios and Functions ■ Relations between Trigonometric
Functions ■ Function Values for Some Special Angles ■ Evaluating Trigonometric
Functions Using a Calculator ■ Complements ■ Applications

5.3

Trigonometric Functions of Any Angle; The Unit Circle

528

Trigonometric Functions of Angles ■ Quadrantal Angles ■ Coterminal
Angles ■ Signs of the Trigonometric Functions ■ Reference Angle ■ Using
Reference Angles ■ Circular Functions

5.4

Graphs of the Sine and Cosine Functions

542

Properties of Sine and Cosine ■ Domain and Range of Sine and Cosine ■ Zeros
of Sine and Cosine Functions ■ Even-Odd Properties of the Sine and Cosine
Functions ■ Periodic Functions ■ Graphs of Sine and Cosine Functions ■ Graph of
the Sine Function ■ Graph of the Cosine Function ■ Five Key Points ■ Symmetries
of the Sine and Cosine Functions ■ Amplitude and Period ■ Phase Shift ■ Vertical
Shifts ■ Modeling with Sinusoidal Curves ■ Simple Harmonic Motion

5.5

Graphs of the Other Trigonometric Functions

567

Tangent Function ■ Graph of y = tan x ■ Graphs of the Reciprocal Functions

5.6

Inverse Trigonometric Functions

577

The Inverse Sine Function ■ The Inverse Cosine Function ■ The Inverse Tangent
Function ■ Other Inverse Trigonometric Functions ■ Evaluating Inverse Trigonometric
Functions ■ Composition of Trigonometric and Inverse Trigonometric Functions

Key Ideas At a Glance, 593 Chapter 5 Review and Tests, 594
Review Exercises, 600 Practice Test A*, 602 Cumulative Review
Exercises Chapters P–5, 602

6

Trigonometric Identities and Equations
6.1

Trigonometric Identities

603

604

Fundamental Trigonometric Identities ■ Simplifying a Trigonometric
Expression ■ Trigonometric Equations and Identities ■ Process of
Verifying Trigonometric Identities ■ Methods of Verifying Trigonometric
Identities

6.2

Sum and Difference Formulas

616

Sum and Difference Formulas for Cosine ■ Cofunction Identities ■ Sum
and Difference Formulas for Sine ■ Sum and Difference Formulas for
Tangent ■ Reduction Formula

6.3

Double-Angle and Half-Angle Formulas

629

Double-Angle Formulas ■ Power-Reducing Formulas ■ Alternating Current ■
Half-Angle Formulas

6.4

Product-to-Sum and Sum-to-Product Formulas

640

Product-to-Sum Formulas ■ Sum-to-Product Formulas ■ Verify Trigonometric
Identities ■ Analyzing Touch-Tone Phones

Contents

6.5

Trigonometric Equations I

ix

648

Trigonometric Equations ■ Trigonometric Equations of the Form
a sin( x − c ) = k , a cos( x − c ) = k , and a tan( x − c ) = k ■ Trigonometric
Equations and the Zero-Product Property ■ Equations with More Than One
Trigonometric Function ■ Extraneous Solutions

6.6

Trigonometric Equations II

658

Equations Involving Multiple Angles ■ Using Sum-to-Product Identities ■
Equations Containing Inverse Functions

Key Ideas At a Glance, 668 Chapter 6 Review and Tests, 669
Review Exercises, 672 Practice Test A*, 674 Cumulative Review
Exercises Chapters P–6, 675

7

Applications of Trigonometric Functions
7.1

The Law of Sines

676

677

Solving Oblique Triangles ■ The Law of Sines ■ Solving AAS and ASA
Triangles ■ Solving SSA Triangles—the Ambiguous Case ■ Bearings

7.2

The Law of Cosines

693

The Law of Cosines ■ Derivation of the Law of Cosines ■ Solving SAS
Triangles ■ Solving SSS Triangles

7.3

Areas of Polygons Using Trigonometry

705

Geometry Formulas ■ Area of SAS Triangles ■ Area of AAS and ASA
Triangles ■ Area of SSS Triangles ■ Applications ■ Polygons

7.4

Vectors 717
Vectors ■ Geometric Vectors ■ Equivalent Vectors ■ Adding Vectors ■ Algebraic
Vectors ■ Unit Vectors ■ Vectors in i, j Form ■ Vector in Terms of Magnitude and
Direction ■ Applications of Vectors

7.5

The Dot Product 730
The Dot Product ■ The Angle Between Two Vectors ■ Orthogonal
Vectors ■ Projection of a Vector ■ Decomposition of a Vector ■ Work

7.6

Polar Coordinates

741

Polar Coordinates ■ Multiple Representations ■ Sign of r ■ Converting Between
Polar and Rectangular Forms ■ Converting Equations Between Rectangular and
Polar Forms ■ The Graph of a Polar Equation ■ Limaçons

7.7

Polar Form of Complex Numbers; DeMoivre’s Theorem

757

Geometric Representation of Complex Numbers ■ The Absolute Value of a
Complex Number ■ Polar Form of a Complex Number ■ Product and Quotient
in Polar Form ■ Powers of Complex Numbers in Polar Form ■ Roots of Complex
Numbers

Key Ideas At a Glance, 767 Chapter 7 Review and Tests, 768
Review Exercises, 772 Practice Test A*, 773 Cumulative Review
Exercises Chapters P–7, 774
*Practice Test B can be found in the eText.

x

Contents

8

Systems of Equations and Inequalities
8.1

Systems of Linear Equations in Two Variables

775

776

System of Equations ■ Graphical Method ■ Substitution Method ■ Elimination
Method ■ Applications

8.2

Systems of Linear Equations in Three Variables

790

Systems of Linear Equations ■ Number of Solutions of a Linear
System ■ Nonsquare Systems ■ Geometric Interpretation ■ An Application
to CAT Scans

8.3

Partial-Fraction Decomposition

802

Partial Fractions ■ Q ( x ) Has Only Distinct Linear Factors ■ Q ( x ) Has Repeated
Linear Factors ■ Q ( x ) Has Distinct Irreducible Quadratic Factors ■ Q ( x ) Has
Repeated Irreducible Quadratic Factors

8.4

Systems of Nonlinear Equations

813

Systems of Nonlinear Equations ■ Solving Systems of Nonlinear
Equations by Substitution ■ Solving Systems of Nonlinear Equations by
Elimination ■ Applications

8.5

Systems of Inequalities

820

Graph of a Linear Inequality in Two Variables ■ Systems of Linear Inequalities in
Two Variables ■ Nonlinear Inequality ■ Nonlinear Systems

8.6

Linear Programming

832

Linear Programming ■ Solving Linear Programming Problems ■ Applications

Key Ideas At a Glance, 841 Chapter 8 Review and Tests, 842
Review Exercises, 846 Practice Test A*, 848 Cumulative Review
Exercises Chapters P–8, 849

9

Matrices and Determinants
9.1

850

Matrices and Systems of Equations

851

Definition of a Matrix ■ Using Matrices to Solve Linear Systems ■ Gaussian
Elimination ■ Gauss–Jordan Elimination

9.2

Matrix Algebra

867

Equality of Matrices ■ Matrix Addition and Scalar Multiplication ■ Matrix
Multiplication ■ Computer Graphics

9.3

The Matrix Inverse

882

The Multiplicative Inverse of a Matrix ■ Finding the Inverse of a Matrix ■ A Rule
for Finding the Inverse of a 2 × 2 Matrix ■ Solving Systems of Linear Equations by
Using Matrix Inverses ■ Applications of Matrix Inverses ■ Cryptography

Contents

9.4

Determinants and Cramer’s Rule

xi

896

The Determinant of a 2 × 2 Matrix ■ Minors and Cofactors ■ The Determinant of
an n × n Matrix ■ Cramer’s Rule ■ Applications

Key Ideas At a Glance, 908 Chapter 9 Review and Tests, 909
Review Exercises, 913 Practice Test A*, 916 Cumulative Review
Exercises Chapters P–9, 917

10

Conic Sections

918

10.1 Conic Sections: Overview

919

10.2 The Parabola 921
Geometric Definition of a Parabola ■ Equation of a Parabola ■ Translations of
Parabolas ■ Reflecting Property of Parabolas

10.3 The Ellipse

935

Definition of Ellipse ■ Equation of an Ellipse ■ Translations of
Ellipses ■ Applications

10.4 The Hyperbola 948
Definition of Hyperbola ■ The Asymptotes of a Hyperbola ■ Graphing a
Hyperbola with Center (0, 0) ■ Translations of Hyperbolas ■ Applications

Key Ideas At a Glance, 965 Chapter 10 Review and Tests, 966
Review Exercises, 969 Practice Test A*, 970 Cumulative Review
Exercises Chapters P–10, 971

11

Further Topics in Algebra
11.1 Sequences and Series

972

973

Sequences ■ Recursive Formulas ■ Factorial Notation ■ Summation
Notation ■ Series

11.2 Arithmetic Sequences; Partial Sums

985

Arithmetic Sequence ■ Sum of a Finite Arithmetic Sequence

11.3 Geometric Sequences and Series

994

Geometric Sequence ■ Finding the Sum of a Finite Geometric
Sequence ■ Annuities ■ Infinite Geometric Series

11.4 Mathematical Induction

1010

Mathematical Induction ■ Determining the Statement Pk +1 from the
Statement Pk

*Practice Test B can be found in the eText.

xii

Contents

11.5 The Binomial Theorem

1016

Binomial Expansions ■ Pascal’s Triangle ■ The Binomial Theorem ■ Binomial
Coefficients

11.6 Counting Principles

1024

Fundamental Counting Principle ■ Permutations ■ Combinations ■
Distinguishable Permutations ■ Deciding Whether to Use Permutations,
Combinations, or the Fundamental Counting Principle

11.7 Probability

1035

The Probability of an Event ■ The Additive Rule ■ Mutually Exclusive Events ■ The
Complement of an Event ■ Experimental Probabilities

Key Ideas At a Glance, 1045 Chapter 11 Review and Tests, 1046
Review Exercises, 1049 Practice Test A*, 1050 Cumulative Review
Exercises Chapters P–11, 1051
Answers to Selected Exercises A-1
Credits C-1
Index I-1
Practice Test B for all Chapters (available in eText)

T-1

Preface
Students begin precalculus classes with widely varying
backgrounds. Some haven’t taken a math course in several
years and may need to spend time reviewing prerequisite
topics, while others are ready to jump right into new and
challenging material. In Chapter P and in some of the early
sections of other chapters, we have provided review material
in such a way that it can be used or omitted as appropriate
for your course. In addition, students may follow several
paths after completing a precalculus course. Many will continue their study of mathematics in courses such as finite
mathematics, statistics, and calculus. For others, precalculus
may be their last mathematics course.
Responding to the current and future needs of all these
students was essential in creating this text. We introduce each
exercise set with several concept and vocabulary exercises,
consisting of fill-in-the-blank and true-false exercises. They
are not computation-reliant, but rather test whether students
have absorbed the basic concepts and vocabulary of the section. Exercises asking students to extrapolate information
from a given graph now appear in much greater number and
depth throughout the course. We continue to present our content in a systematic way that illustrates how to study and what
to review. We believe that if students use this material well,
they will succeed in this course. The changes in this edition
result from the thoughtful feedback we have received from
students and instructors who have used previous editions of
the text. This feedback crucially enhances our own experiences, and we are extremely grateful to the many contributors
whose insights are reflected in this new edition.

Key Content Changes
New! Authors. We would like to welcome two new coauthors to the author team, Jessica Bernards and Wendy
Fresh! Both Jessica and Wendy are instructors at Portland
Community College and have provided wonderful additions
to the text and the accompanying MyLab Math course. Jessica
and Wendy have had national recognition as instructors and
have received several awards for excellence in teaching mathematics.
Revised! Getting Ready for the Next Section. This feature
combines two features of previous editions, “Getting Ready
for the Next Section” exercises and “Before Starting This
Section, Review” objectives. The new structure lists Review
Concepts and Review Skills for students to brush up on before
beginning the next section. Both the Review Concepts and
Review Skills contain section and page number references to
make looking up these topics easy. The Review Concepts are
meant to be broader topics that students should understand,
while Review Skills give exercises from objectives that students will need in the upcoming section.

New! Key Ideas at a Glance. A new feature added to the text
for this edition is a single page at the end of each chapter
designed to highlight some key concepts for the chapter. In
some chapters, this will serve as a comparison between two
similar or parallel topics. In other chapters, this will sum up
many of the ideas presented in the chapter. This page can
serve as a reference to students to look back on when studying
or doing exercises. There are also exercises to accompany this
feature so that students may test their understanding of the
ideas summarized there.
New and Revised! Exercises. We continue to improve the
balance of exercises, providing a smooth transition from the
less challenging to the more challenging exercises.
Overall, approximately 20% of the exercises have been
updated, and more than 500 brand-new exercises have been
added. These new exercises primarily consist of applications
that connect with students’ everyday experiences and enhance
students’ understanding of graphing.
Revised! Application Exercises. Every section opens with
discussion of an application that relates to the topics introduced in that section. This edition continues the trend of pairing an example with this application, but we have also made
an effort to include problems in the exercise sets that also tie
to this application so that students have an opportunity to
apply the mathematics to a real world problem. The section
opening, example, and these exercises are easily identified by
an accompanying icon .
New! Active Learning Exercises. In many sections throughout the text, exercise sets will end with an Active Learning
exercise. This exercise is accompanied by an Interactive Figure powered by GeoGebra, which is accessed through a bit.ly
link or by scanning the given QR code. Students will manipulate the figure to explore mathematics in a new way and will
use the figure to answer the accompanying exercises.
New! Videos. Videos in the MyLab course have been completely re-made by the authors. Videos can be found at the
section and objective level. The videos are available in the
MyLab course within the Video & Resource Library, but can
also be accessed directly from the text. QR codes can be found
at the beginning of each section, and users can use their phone
to scan the QR codes and watch the videos.
We have also created videos for select exercises in each
section. The text has QR codes next to the beginning of each
exercise set, and users can scan the code to find the videos for
exercises in that section.
Revised! Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion. We conducted an
external review of the text’s content to determine how it could
be improved to address issues related to diversity, equity, and
inclusion. The results of that review informed the revision.
xiii

xiv

Preface

Chapter 1.
• Added a graphic to detail the process of factoring a trinomial.
• Added more Procedure by Action type examples which
carefully breakdown factoring trinomials.
• Created a new section opener for section 1.5 highlighting
female NASA engineers’ current Mars Exploration Program

Chapter 8.
• Wrote all new section opener discussions for sections 8.1
and 8.5.
• Added a new example in section 8.5 showing an application
involving cell tower triangulation.
• Included new Active Learning Exercises.

Chapter 2.
• Updated several examples and with newer application context.
• Expanded step by step transformation of functions procedure.
• Split a Procedure in Action example into two parts to give individual attention to finding a parallel line vs a perpendicular line
to a given line.
• Included new Active Learning Exercises.

Chapter 9.
• Added a link between the section opener discussion and an
example in section 9.4.
• Included new Active Learning Exercises.

Chapter 3.
• Added more visual aid to the examples on graphing a polynomial, giving a more complete picture of the behavior of
graphs of polynomials.
• Added more visual aid to the examples on graphing a rational function, giving a more complete picture of the behavior of graphs of rational functions.
• Included new Active Learning Exercises.
Chapter 4.
• Expanded on the basic properties of logarithms to give
some derivations of these properties.
• Added color to the table of logarithmic functions to make
it easier to see how changes in the function change the
graph itself.
• Included new Active Learning Exercises.
Chapter 5.
• Updated graphs for sine and cosine functions to give additional detail around key points.
• Created new graphics to show the symmetries of the sine
and cosine functions.
• Updated graphics showing stretch and compression of sine
and cosine graphs.
• Updated graphics showing phase shifts and vertical shifts
of sine and cosine graphs.
• Added additional graphics for the inverse sine, cosine, and
tangent functions.
• Included new Active Learning Exercises.
Chapter 6.
• Added a graphic to demonstrate one of the Pythagorean
identities.
• Added graphics to support trigonometric identities using
the symmetries of the sine and cosine functions.
• Included new Active Learning Exercises.
Chapter 7
• Updated and added graphics and explanation for the
ambiguous case of SSA triangles.
• Updated solution process for SSA triangles.
• Included new Active Learning Exercises.

Chapter 10.
• Added many examples of conics seen and used in the real
world.
• Included new Active Learning Exercises.
Chapter 11.
• Changed terms used in the sum of the first n terms of an arithmetic sequence so that the derivation of the formula is clearer.
• Added graphics to demonstrate the derivation of the sum
of the first n terms of arithmetic and geometric sequences.
• Included new Active Learning Exercises.

Features
Chapter Opener. Each chapter opener includes a description of applications (one of them illustrated) relevant to the
content of the chapter and the list of topics that will be covered. In one page, students see what they are going to learn
and why they are learning it.
Getting Ready for the Next Section. Each section is immediately preceded by a set of concepts and skills that serve as a
transition from one section to the next. These sets of problems
provide a review of concepts and skills that will be used in the
upcoming section.
Section Opener With Application. Each section opens
with a list of clearly stated and numbered Objectives defined
for the section. These objectives are then referenced again in
the margin of the lesson at the point where the objective’s topic
is taught. An Application containing a motivating anecdote or
an interesting problem then follows. An example later in the
section relating to this application and identified by the same
icon ( ) is then solved using the mathematics covered in the
section. These applications utilize material from a variety of
fields: the physical and biological sciences (including health
sciences), economics, art and architecture, history, and more.
Examples and Practice Problems. Examples include a
wide range of computational, conceptual, and modern applied
problems carefully selected to build confidence, competency,
and understanding. Every example has a title indicating its
purpose and presents a detailed solution containing annotated
steps. All examples are followed by a Practice Problem for

Preface

students to try so that they can check their understanding of
the concept covered. Answers to the Practice Problems are
provided in the back of the book.

Procedure in Action Examples. These types of examples,
interspersed throughout the text, present important procedures
in numbered steps. Special Procedure in Action examples
present important multistep procedures, such as the steps for
doing synthetic division, in a two-column format. The steps
of the procedure are given in the left column, and an example
is worked, following these steps, in the right column. This
approach provides students with a clear model with which
they can compare when encountering difficulty in their work.
Additional Pedagogical Features
Definitions, Theorems, Properties, and Rules are all boxed
and titled for emphasis and ease of reference.
Warnings appear as appropriate throughout the text to apprise
students of common errors and pitfalls that can trip them up in
their thinking or calculations.
Summary of Main Facts boxes summarize information
related to equations and their graphs, such as those of the
conic sections.
A Calculus Symbol appears next to information in the text
that is essential for the study of calculus.

Margin Notes
Side Notes provide hints for handling newly introduced concepts.
Recall notes remind students of a key idea learned earlier in
the text that will help them work through a current problem.
Technology Connections give students tips on using calculators to solve problems, check answers, and reinforce concepts.
Note that the use of graphing calculators is optional in this text.
Do You Know? Features provide students with additional
interesting information on topics to keep them engaged in the
mathematics presented.

Exercises. The heart of any textbook is its exercises, so we
have tried to ensure that the quantity, quality, and variety of
exercises meet the needs of all students. Exercises are carefully
graded to strengthen the skills developed in the section and are
organized using the following categories.
Concepts and Vocabulary exercises begin each exercise set
with problems that assess the student’s grasp of the definitions
and ideas introduced in that section. These true-false and
fill-in-the-blank exercises help to rapidly identify gaps in
comprehension of the material in that section.
Building Skills exercises develop fundamental skills—each
odd-numbered exercise is closely paired with its consecutive
even-numbered exercise.

xv

Applying the Concepts exercises use the section’s material
to solve real-world problems—all are titled and relevant to the
topics of the section.
Beyond the Basics exercises provide more challenging
problems that give students an opportunity to reach beyond
the material covered in the section—these are generally more
theoretical in nature and are suitable for honors students,
special assignments, or extra credit.
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing exercises, appearing
as appropriate, are designed to develop students’ higher-level
, are
thinking skills. Calculator problems, identified by
included where needed.
Active Learning exercises allow students to explore
mathematical concepts in new ways. Students have the chance
to manipulate Interactive Figures and answer accompanying
questions.

Key Ideas at a Glance. This one page feature found at
the end of each chapter highlights some key concepts in each
chapter. In some chapters, this will serve as a comparison
between two similar or parallel topics. In other chapters,
this will sum up many of the ideas presented in the chapter.
This page can serve as a reference to students to look back
on when studying or doing exercises. There are also exercises
to accompany this feature so that students may test their
understanding of the ideas summarized there.
Chapter Review and Tests. The chapter-ending material
begins with an extensive Review featuring a two-column,
section-by-section summary of the definitions, concepts,
and formulas covered in that chapter, with corresponding
examples. This review provides a description and examples
of key topics indicating where the material occurs in the
text, and encourages students to reread sections rather than
memorize definitions out of context. Review Exercises
provide students with an opportunity to practice what they
have learned in the chapter. Then students are given two
chapter test options. They can take Practice Test A in the
usual open-ended format and/or Practice Test B, covering
the same topics, in a multiple-choice format. Practice Test
B has been moved online for this edition, and can be found
in the eText. All tests are designed to increase student
comprehension and verify that students have mastered the
skills and concepts in the chapter. Mastery of these materials
should indicate a true comprehension of the chapter and the
likelihood of success on the associated in-class examination.
Cumulative Review Exercises appear at the end of every
chapter, starting with Chapter 2, to remind students that
mathematics is not modular and that what is learned in the
first part of the book will be useful in later parts of the book
and on the final examination.

xvi

Preface

MyLab Math Resources for Success
MyLab Math is available to accompany Pearson’s marketleading text options, including Precalculus: A Right Triangle
Approach, 5th Edition (access code required).
MyLab™ is the teaching and learning platform that empowers you to reach every student. MyLab Math combines trusted
author content—including full eText and assessment with
immediate feedback—with digital tools and a flexible platform to personalize the learning experience and improve
results for each student.
MyLab Math supports all learners, regardless of their
ability and background, in order to provide an equal opportunity for success. Accessible resources support learners for
a more equitable experience no matter their abilities. And
options to personalize learning and address individual gaps
help to provide each learner with the specific resources they
need in order to achieve success.

learning. The Video Notebook is available as PDFs and
customizable Word files in MyLab Math. Instructors can
also use the video notebook as a guide when creating
their own lecture notes in a traditional lecture class. This
way an instructor has pre-built lecture notes ready to go,
or an easily adaptable set of lecture notes ready to be
modified for the needs of their students.
▼ NEW! Mathematical study skills videos, created by
co-authors Jessica Bernards and Wendy Fresh, motivate
students to stick with their math course and offer practical tips
to succeed. The animated character, Polly Nomial, guides students through topics such as How Learning Math is Different
and Having a Growth Mindset in Math that any math student
could benefit from watching. These ten study skills videos
have pre-built assignments that include assessment questions
that test students’ understanding of the content.

Student Resources
Motivate Your Students—Students are motivated to succeed
when they’re engaged in the learning experience and understand
the relevance and power of math.
▼ NEW! Section Lecture Videos—Co-authors Jessica
Bernards and Wendy Fresh (Portland Community College)
have created all new Section videos, segmented and assignable
by objective, using their years of teaching experience for
online courses and flipped classrooms. Instructors can assign
a full objective or only the segment that is needed. The videos
allow students an opportunity to learn from experienced
master teachers breaking down complex topics in an easy-tounderstand manner.

•

NEW! Personal Inventory Assessments are a
collection of online exercises designed to promote selfreflection and metacognition in students. These 33
assessments include topics such as a Stress Management
Assessment, Diagnosing Poor Performance and Enhancing
Motivation, and Time Management Assessment.

Address Underpreparedness—Each student learns at a different pace. Personalized learning pinpoints the precise areas
where each student needs practice, giving all students the support
they need—when and where they need it—to be successful.

•

NEW! Video Notebook is a note-taking guide that
gives students a structured place to take notes and work
the example problems as they watch the videos.
Definitions and important concepts are highlighted,
helpful tips are pointed out along the way. Jessica
Bernards and Wendy Fresh author this supplement to
make sure students are actively engaged with their

NEW! Integrated Review can be used in corequisite
courses, or simply to help students who enter Precalculus
without a full understanding of prerequisite skills and concepts.
• Integrated Review at the chapter level provides a Skills
Check assessment to pinpoint which prerequisites topics, if
any, students need to review.
• Students who require additional review proceed to a
personalized homework assignment to remediate.
• Integrated Review videos and worksheets provide
additional instruction.

Instructors who prefer to review at the section level can assign
the Enhanced Assignments instead.

Learn more at pearson.com/mylab/math

Preface

xvii

Personalized Homework—With Personalized Homework,
students take a quiz or test and receive a subsequent homework
assignment that is personalized based on their performance.
This way, students can focus on just the topics they have not
yet mastered.

MyLab Math Question Library is correlated to the exercises in
the text, reflecting each author’s approach and learning style.
They regenerate algorithmically to give students unlimited
opportunity for practice and mastery. Below are a few exercise
types available to assign:

Other student resources include the following:

▼

•

NEW! Interactive Figures bring mathematical concepts
to life, helping students see the concepts through directed
explorations and purposeful manipulation. For this revision,
we added many more interactive figures (in editable GeoGebra
format) to the Video & Resource Library. The instructional
videos that accompany the text now include Interactive
Figures to teach key concepts. These figures are assignable in
MyLab Math and encourage active learning, critical thinking,
and conceptual understanding.

NEW! GeoGebra Exercises are gradable graphing and
computational exercises that help students demonstrate
their understanding. They enable students to interact
directly with the graph in a manner that reflects how
students would graph on paper.

• Solution Manual—Written by Beverly Fusfield, the
Student’s Solution Manual provides detailed worked-out
solutions to the odd-numbered end-of-section and Chapter
Review exercises as well as solutions to all the Practice
Problems, Practice Tests, and Cumulative Review problems.
Available in MyLab Math.

Instructor Resources
Your course is unique. So whether you’d like to build your
own assignments, teach multiple sections, or set prerequisites,
MyLab gives you the flexibility to easily create your course to
fit your needs.
Pre-Built Assignments are designed to maximize students’
performance. All assignments are fully editable to make your
course your own.

•

•

NEW! Enhanced Assignments—These section-level
assignments have three unique properties:
1. They help keep skills fresh with spaced practice of
previously learned concepts.
2. Learning aids are strategically turned off for some
exercises to ensure students understand how to work
the exercises independently.
3. They contain personalized prerequisite skills
exercises for gaps identified in the chapter-level Skills
Check Quiz.
NEW! Learning Assignments—Section-level assign­
ments are especially helpful for online classes or flipped
classes, where some or all learning takes place independently. These assignments include objective-level videos
and interactive figures for student exploration followed by
corresponding MyLab questions to ensure engagement and
understanding. Instructors can assign the video notebook for
students to fill out as they complete these video assignments.

• Setup & Solve Exercises require students to first describe
how they will set up and approach the problem. This
reinforces conceptual understanding of the process applied
in approaching the problem, promotes long-term retention
of the skill, and mirrors what students will be expected to
do on a test.
• Concept and Vocabulary—Each exercise section begins
with exercises that assess the student’s grasp of the
definitions and ideas introduced in that section. These truefalse and fill-in-the-blank exercises help to rapidly identify
gaps in comprehension and are assignable in MyLab Math
and Learning Catalytics.
Learning Catalytics—With Learning Cataltyics, you’ll
hear from every student when it matters most. You pose
a variety of questions in class (choosing from pre-loaded
questions or your own) that help students recall ideas, apply
concepts, and develop critical-thinking skills. Your students
respond using their own smartphones, tablets, or laptops.
Performance Analytics enable instructors to see and analyze

student performance across multiple courses. Based on their
current course progress, individuals’ performance is identified
above, at, or below expectations through a variety of graphs
and visualizations.

Learn more at pearson.com/mylab/math

xviii

Preface

Now included with Performance Analytics, Early Alerts use
predictive analytics to identify struggling students—even if
their assignment scores are not a cause for concern. In both
Performance Analytics and Early Alerts, instructors can email
students individually or by group to provide feedback.
Accessibility—Pearson works continuously to ensure our
products are as accessible as possible to all students. Currently
we work toward achieving WCAG 2.0 AA for our existing products (2.1 AA for future products) and Section 508 standards, as
expressed in the Pearson Guidelines for Accessible Educational
Web Media (https://wps.pearsoned.com/accessibility/).
Other instructor resources include the following:
•

Instructor Solution Manual—Written by Bevery Fusfield,

the Instructor’s Solutions Manual provides complete
solutions for all end-of-section exercises, including the
Critical Thinking/Discussion/Writing Projects, Practice
Problems, Chapter Review exercises, Practice Tests, and
Cumulative Review problems.

•

PowerPoint Lecture Slides feature presentations written
and designed specifically for this text, including figures and
examples from the text. Accessible versions of the
PowerPoints are also available.

•

TestGen enables instructors to build, edit, print, and

administer tests using a computerized bank of questions
developed to cover all the objectives of the text. TestGen
is algorithmically based, allowing instructors to create
multiple but equivalent versions of the same questions
or test with the click of a button. Instructors can also
modify test bank questions or add new questions. The
software and test bank are available for download at
pearson.com.
•

Test Bank features a printable PDF containing all the test

exercises available in TestGen. The current version
contains 6 forms of tests per chapter in PDF format.
Forms A-D are open-ended. Forms E and F are multiple
choice.

Acknowledgments
We would like to express our gratitude to the reviewers of this
fifth edition (marked with an asterisk) and previous editions,
who provided such invaluable insights and comments. Their
contributions helped shape the development of the text and
carry out the vision stated in the Preface.
Alison Ahlgren, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Mohammad Aslam, Georgia Perimeter College
Mario Barrientos, Angelo State University
Ratan Barua, Miami-Dade College
Sam Bazzi, Henry Ford Community College
Elizabeth Bowman, The University of Alabama at Huntsville
Diane Burleson, Central Piedmont Community College
*Christina C, Northern Arizona University
Maureen T. Carroll, University of Scranton
Melissa Cass, State University of New York–New Paltz
Jason Cates, Lone Star College–Montgomery
Charles Conrad, Volunteer State Community College
Irene Coriette, Cameron University
Douglas Culler, Midlands Technical College
*Ryan DeFronzo, New Hampshire Technical Institute
Baiqiao Deng, Columbus State University
Hussain Elaloui-Talibi, Tuskegee University
Kathleen M. Fick, Methodist University–Fayetteville
Junko Forbes, El Camino College
Gene Garza, Samford University
Steven Gonzales, San Antonio College
Bobbie Jo Hill, Coastal Bend College
Fran Hopf, University of South Florida
Natalie Hutchinson, Old Dominion University
Nyeita Irish, Coastal Carolina University

Yvette Janecek, Coastal Bend College
Rose M. Jenkins, Midlands Technical College
Mohammad Kazemi, University of North Carolina at
Charlotte
David Keller, Kirkwood Community College
Diana Klimek, New Jersey Institute of Technology
Mile Krajcevski, University of South Florida
*Jennifer La Fleur, Harford Community College
Lance Lana, University of Colorado–Denver
Alexander Lavrentiev, University of Wisconsin–Fox Valley
Rebecca Leefers, Michigan State University
*Weston Loucks, Northern Arizona University
Paul Morgan, College of Southern Idaho
Kathy Nickell, College of DuPage
Catherine Pellish, Front Range Community College
Betty Peterson, Mercer County Community College
Edward K. Pigg, Southern Union Community College
*Carrie Quesnell, Weber State University
Marshall Ransom, Georgia Southern University
Janice F. Rech, University of Nebraska–Omaha
Traci Reed, St. Johns River Community College
Linda Reist, Macomb Community College
Jeri Rogers, Seminole Community College–Oviedo Campus
Jason Rose, College of Southern Idaho
Mehdi Sadatmousavi, Pima Community College–West
Christy Schmidt, Northwest Vista College
Nyeita Schult, Coastal Carolina University
Delphy Shaulis, University of Colorado–Boulder
Cindy Shaw, Moraine Valley Community College
Cynthia Sikes, Georgia Southern University

Preface

*Mary Alice Smeal, University of Alabama at Huntsville
James Smith, Columbia State Community College
Linda Snellings-Neal, Wright State University
Jacqueline Stone, University of Maryland–College Park
Kay Stroope, Phillips County Community College
Robert J. Strozak, Old Dominion University
Helen Timberlake, Rochester Institute of Technology
Frances Tishkevich, Massachusetts Maritime Academy
Jo Tucker, Tarrant County College–Southeast
Violeta Vasilevska, Utah Valley University
Roger Werbylo, Pima Community College–West
Denise Williams, Coastal Carolina University
Tom Worthing, Hutchinson Community College
Vivian Zabrocki, Montana State University–Billings
Marti Zimmerman, University of Louisville
We would like to thank the following faculty members who
provided input on the MyLab Math course:
Don Busenbark
Mariana Durgheu
Pamela Fails
Yvette Janecek
Minsu Kim
Paul Kimble
C.J. Kish
David Kroon
Robert Parr
Brendan Santangelo
Curtis White

xix

Our sincerest thanks go to the legion of dedicated individuals who worked tirelessly to make this book possible. We
would like to express our gratitude to our typist, Beverly
DeVine-Hoffmeyer, for her amazing patience and skill. We
must also thank Dr. Praveen Rohatgi, Dr. Nalini Rohatgi,
and Dr. Bhupinder Bedi for the consulting they provided on
all material relating to medicine. We particularly want to
thank Professors Mile Krajcevski, Viktor Maymeskul, and
Scott Rimbey for many helpful discussions and suggestions,
particularly for improving the exercise sets. Further gratitude is due to Irena Andreevska, Gokarna Aryal, Ferene
Tookos, and Christine Fitch for their assistance on the
answers to the exercises in the text. In addition, we would
like to thank De Cook, Doug Ewert, John Samons, and Beverly Fusfield, for their meticulous accuracy in checking the
text. Thanks are due as well to Sharon Cahill and Straive for
their excellent production work. Finally, our thanks are
extended to the professional and remarkable staff at Pearson
Education. In particular, we would like to thank Brian Fisher,
Jeff Weidenaar, and Jon Krebs for Content Management;
Jessica Darczuk, Product Manager; Tamela Ambush, Content Producer; Sandra Rodriguez, Managing Producer; Stacey Sveum, Product Marketing Manager; Eric Gregg,
Manager of Content Development for MathXL; Nick Sweeney, Media Producer; and Joe Vetere, Senior Author Support
Technology Specialist.
We invite all who use this book to send suggestions for
improvements to Marcus McWaters at mmm@usf.edu.

Pearson’s Commitment
to Diversity, Equity,
and Inclusion
Pearson is dedicated to creating bias-free content that reflects the diversity,
depth, and breadth of all learners’ lived experiences.
We embrace the many dimensions of diversity, including but not limited to race, ethnicity, gender,
sex, sexual orientation, socioeconomic status, ability, age, and religious or political beliefs.
Education is a powerful force for equity and change in our world. It has the potential to deliver
opportunities that improve lives and enable economic mobility. As we work with authors to ­create
content for every product and service, we acknowledge our responsibility to demonstrate i­nclusivity
and incorporate diverse scholarship so that everyone can achieve their potential through learning.
As the world’s leading learning company, we have a duty to help drive change and live up to our
­purpose to help more people create a better life for themselves and to create a better world.
Our ambition is to purposefully contribute to a world where:
• Everyone has an equitable and lifelong opportunity
to succeed through learning.

• Our educational products and services are inclusive
and represent the rich diversity of learners.

• Our educational content accurately reflects the ­
histories and lived experiences of the learners
we serve.

• Our educational content prompts deeper ­discussions
with students and motivates them to expand their
own learning (and worldview).

Accessibility

Contact Us

We are also committed to providing products that are fully
accessible to all learners. As per Pearson’s guidelines for
accessible educational Web media, we test and retest the
capabilities of our products against the highest standards
for every release, following the WCAG guidelines in developing new products for copyright year 2022 and beyond.

While we work hard to present unbiased, fully accessible
content, we want to hear from you about any concerns
or needs with this Pearson product so that we can
i­nvestigate and address them.

You can learn more about Pearson’s
commitment to ­accessibility at
https://www.pearson.com/us/accessibility.html.

xx

Please contact us with concerns about any
potential bias at
https://www.pearson.com/report-bias.html.
For accessibility-related issues, such as using
assistive ­technology with Pearson products,
alternative text requests, or accessibility
documentation, email the Pearson Disability Support
team at disability.support@pearson.com.

DEDICATION
To Our Spouses,
Lata, Debra, Leslie, Kevin, and Jon

P

Basic Concepts
of Algebra

TOPICS
P.1 The Real Numbers and
Their Properties
P.2 Integer Exponents and
Scientific Notation
P.3 Polynomials
P.4 Factoring
Polynomials
P.5 Rational Expressions
P.6 Rational Exponents
and Radicals

Many fascinating patterns in human and natural processes
can be described in the language of algebra. We investigate
events ranging from chirping crickets to the behavior of falling
objects.

1

2

Chapter P Basic Concepts of Algebra

P.1

The Real Numbers and
Their Properties
Objectives

Videos for
this Section

1

Classify sets of real numbers.

2

Use exponents.

3

Use the ordering of the real numbers.

4

Specify sets of numbers in roster or set-builder notation.

5

Use interval notation.

6

Relate absolute value and distance on the real number line.

7

Use the order of operations in arithmetic expressions.

8

Identify and use properties of real numbers.

9

Evaluate algebraic expressions.

Cricket Chirps and Temperature
Crickets are sensitive to changes in air temperature; their chirps
speed up as the temperature gets warmer and slow down as it
gets cooler. It is possible to use the chirps of the male snowy tree
cricket (Oecanthus fultoni), common throughout the United
States, to gauge temperature. (The insect is found in every U.S.
state except Hawaii, Alaska, Montana, and Florida.) By counting
the chirps of this cricket, which lives in bushes a few feet from the
ground, you can gauge temperature. Snowy tree crickets are
more accurate than most cricket species; their chirps are slow
enough to count, and they synchronize their singing. To convert
cricket chirps to degrees Fahrenheit, count the number of chirps
in 14 seconds and then add 40 to get the temperature. To convert
cricket chirps to degrees Celsius, count the number of chirps in
25 seconds, divide by 3, and then add 4 to get the temperature.
In Example 12, we evaluate algebraic expressions to learn the
temperature from the number of cricket chirps.

Objective 1

Classifying Numbers
In algebra, we use letters such as a, b, x, y, and so on, to represent numbers. A letter that is
used to represent one or more numbers is called a variable. A constant is a specific num1
ber such as 3 or or a letter that represents a fixed (but not necessarily specified) number.
2
Physicists use the letter c as a constant to represent the speed of light (c ≈ 300,000,000
meters per second).

Section P.1 The Real Numbers and Their Properties
SIDE NOTE
Here is one difficulty with
attempting to divide by 0: If, for
5
example, = a , then 5 = a ⋅ 0.
0
However, a ⋅ 0 = 0 for all
numbers a. So we would have
5 = 0 ; this contradiction
demonstrates that there is no
5
appropriate choice for .
0

3

We use two variables, a and b, to denote the results of the operations of addition ( a + b ),
a
subtraction ( a − b ), multiplication ( a × b or a ⋅ b ), and division a ÷ b or
. These
b
operations are called binary operations because each is performed on two numbers.
We frequently omit the multiplication sign when writing a product involving two variables (or a constant and a variable) so that a ⋅ b and ab indicate the same product. Both a
and b are called factors in the product a ⋅ b. This is a good time to recall that we never
a
divide by zero. For to represent a real number, b cannot be zero.
b

(

)

Equality of Numbers
The equal sign, = , is used much like we use the word is in English. The equal sign means
that the number or expression on the left side is equal or equivalent to the number or
expression on the right side. We write a ≠ b to indicate that a is not equal to b.

Classifying Sets of Numbers
The idea of a set is familiar to us. We regularly refer to “a set of baseball cards,” a “set of
CDs,” or “a set of dishes.” In mathematics, as in everyday life, a set is a collection of
objects. The objects in the set are called the elements, or members, of the set. Capital letters are usually used to name a set. In the study of algebra, we are interested primarily in
sets of numbers.
In listing the elements of a set, it is customary to enclose the listed elements in braces,
{ }, and separate them with commas.
We distinguish among various sets of numbers.
The numbers we use to count with constitute the set N of natural numbers:
N = {1, 2, 3, 4, . . . }.
The three dots . . . (called ellipsis) may be read as “and so on” and indicate that the pattern
continues indefinitely.
The set W of whole numbers is formed by including the number 0 with the natural
numbers to obtain the set: W = { 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, . . . }.
The set Z of integers consists of the set N of natural numbers together with their opposites and 0: Z = { . . . , −4, −3, −2, −1, 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, . . . } .

Rational Numbers
The rational numbers consist of all numbers that can be expressed as the quotient or ratio,
a
, of two integers, where b ≠ 0. The letter Q is often used to represent the set of rational
b
numbers.
1 5 −4
7
, and 0.07 =
Examples of rational numbers are , ,
. Any integer a can be
2 3 17
100
a
expressed as the quotient of two integers by writing a = . Consequently, every integer is
1
0
also a rational number. In particular, 0 is a rational number because 0 = .
1
a
The rational number can be written as a decimal by using long division. When any
b
integer a is divided by an integer b, b ≠ 0, the result is always a terminating decimal
1
2
such as = 0.5 or a nonterminating repeating decimal such as = 0.666 . . . .
2
3
We sometimes place a bar over the repeating digits in a nonterminating repeating
2
141
decimal. Thus, = 0.666 . . . = 0.6 and
= 1.2818181 . . . = 1.281.
3
110

4

Chapter P Basic Concepts of Algebra

EXAMPLE 1

Converting Decimal Rationals to a Quotient

Write the rational number 7.45 as the ratio of two integers in lowest terms.

Solution
Let x = 7.454545 . . . . Then
100 x = 745.4545 . . .
subtract

x = 7.4545 . . .
99 x = 738

100 x − x = 99 x

738
99
82 × 9
=
11 × 9
82
x =
.
11
x =

diameter

Multiply both sides by 100.

Divide both sides by 99.
Common factor
Reduce to lowest terms.

Practice Problem 1. Repeat Example 1 for 2.132132132 . . . .
p5

Figure P.1

circumference
diameter

Irrational Numbers

Definition of π

An irrational number is a real number that cannot be written as a ratio of two integers.
This means that its decimal representation must be nonrepeating and nonterminating. We
can construct such a decimal using only the digits 0 and 1, such as 0.01001000100001. . . .
Because each group of zeros contains one more zero than the previous group, no group of
digits repeats. Other numbers such as π (“pi”; see Figure P.1) and 2 (the square root of 2;
see Figure P.2) can also be expressed as decimals that neither terminate nor repeat; so they
are irrational numbers as well. We can obtain an approximation of an irrational number by
using an initial portion of its decimal representation. For example, we can write
π ≈ 3.14159 or 2 ≈ 1.41421, where the symbol ≈ is read “is approximately equal to.”
No familiar process, such as long division, is available for obtaining the decimal representation of an irrational number. However, your calculator can provide a useful approximation for irrational numbers such as 2. (Try it!) Because a calculator displays a fixed
number of decimal places, it gives a rational approximation of an irrational number.
It is usually not easy to determine whether a specific number is irrational. One helpful
fact in this regard is that the square root of any natural number that is not a perfect square
is irrational. So 6 is irrational but 16 = 4 2 = 4 is rational.
Because rational numbers have decimal representations that either terminate or repeat,
whereas irrational numbers do not have such representations, no number is both rational
and irrational.
The rational numbers together with the irrational numbers form the set R of real numbers.
The diagram in Figure P.3 shows how various sets of numbers are related. For example,
every natural number is also a whole number, an integer, a rational number, and a real number.

2

1

1

Figure P.2

RECALL
An integer is a perfect square if
it is a product a ⋅ a, where a is
an integer. For example,
9 = 3 ⋅ 3 is a perfect square.

Real Numbers
Rational numbers
1
2 2
23, 2 , 0, , 3 , 5.78
2
3 5

Irrational numbers
2, p, 2 3, 11 5

Integers
. . ., 22, 21, 0, 1, 2, . . .
Whole numbers
0, 1, 2, 3, . . .
Natural numbers
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, . . .

Figure P.3

Relationships among sets of real numbers

Section P.1 The Real Numbers and Their Properties

EXAMPLE 2

5

Identifying Sets of Numbers

{

6
2
5 1
Let A = −17, −5, − , − , 0,
, ,
3
3
12 2

2, π,

}

35, 7, 18 .

Identify all the elements of the set A that are
a. Natural numbers
d. Rational numbers

b. Whole numbers
e. Irrational numbers

c. Integers
f. Real numbers

Solution
a. Natural numbers: 7 and 18
b. Whole numbers: 0, 7, and 18
c. Integers: −17, −5, −

6
3

(or −2), 0, 7, and 18

6 2
5 1
d. Rational numbers: −17, −5, − , − , 0,
, , 7, and 18
3 3
12 2
e. Irrational numbers: 2, π, and 35
f. Real numbers: All numbers in the set A are real numbers.
Practice Problem 2. Repeat Example 2 for the following set:

{

B = −6, −

Objective 2

21 1
4
, − , 0, ,
7
2
3

}

3, 2, 17, 7 .

Integer Exponents
The area of a square with sides of five feet each is 5 ⋅ 5 = 25 square feet.
The volume of a cube that has sides of 5 feet each is 5 ⋅ 5 ⋅ 5 = 125 cubic feet.

5 ft
5 ft

5 ft
Area 5 5.5 square feet

5 ft
5 ft
Volume 5 5.5.5 cubic feet

A shorter notation for 5 ⋅ 5 is 5 2 and for 5 ⋅ 5 ⋅ 5 is 5 3. The number 5 is called the
base for both 5 2 and 5 3. The number 2 is called the exponent in the expression 5 2 and indicates
that the base 5 appears as a factor twice.

an
base

exponent

Positive Integer Exponent
If a is a real number and n is a positive integer, then
a n = a
⋅ a ⋅.
. . ⋅a.
n factors

The number a n is called the nth power of a and is read “a to the nth power,” or “a to
the n.” The number a is called the base; n, the exponent. We adopt the convention
that a 1 = a.

6

Chapter P Basic Concepts of Algebra

EXAMPLE 3

Evaluating Expressions That Use Exponents

TECHNOLOGY CONNECTION

Evaluate each expression.

Type 5^3 for 5 3 on a graphing

a. 5 3

calculator. Any expression
on a calculator enclosed in
parentheses and followed by ^n
is raised to the nth power.
A common error is to forget
parentheses when computing
an expression such as ( −3 ) 2 ,
with the result being −3 2. Newer
graphing calculators, such as
the TI-84 series, provide display
options called CLASSIC and
MATHPRINT . The MATHPRINT
option displays 5^3 as 5 3 but
still requires you to type 5, then
^, then 3.

b. ( −3 ) 2

d. ( −2 )3

c. −3 2

Solution
a. 5 3 = 5 ⋅ 5 ⋅ 5 = 125    5 is the base, and 3 is the exponent.
b. ( −3 ) 2 = ( −3 )( −3 ) = 9    (−3) 2 is the opposite of 3, squared.
c. −3 2 = −3 ⋅ 3 = −9   Multiplication of 3 ⋅ 3 occurs first. (−3 2 is the opposite of 3 2.)
d. ( −2 )3 = ( −2 )( −2 )( −2 ) = −8
Practice Problem 3. Evaluate the following.
a. 2 3   b. ( 3a ) 2    c.

4

( 12 ) 

In Example 3, pay careful attention to the fact (from parts b and c) that ( −3 ) 2 ≠ −3 2.
In ( −3 ) 2 , the parentheses indicate that the exponent 2 applies to the base −3, whereas in −3 2 ,
the absence of parentheses indicates that the exponent applies only to the base 3. When n is
even, ( −a ) n ≠ −a n for a ≠ 0.

The Real Number Line

CLASSIC Mode

We associate the real numbers with points on a geometric line (imagined to be extended
indefinitely in both directions) in such a way that each real number corresponds to exactly
one point and each point corresponds to exactly one real number. The point is called the
graph of the corresponding real number, and the real number is called the coordinate of
the point. By agreement, positive numbers lie to the right of the point corresponding to 0
and negative numbers lie to the left of 0. See Figure P.4.
1
1
Notice that and − , 2 and −2, and π and −π correspond to pairs of points exactly the
2
2
same distance from 0 but on opposite sides of 0.
2p
23

MATHPRINT Mode
In this text we will display
screens in MATHPRINT mode.

1 unit

22.25

Figure P.4

22 2

2 21

1
22

0

1
2

2.25
1

2

2

p
3

The real number line

When coordinates have been assigned to points on a line in the manner just described,
the line is called a real number line, a coordinate line, a real line, or simply a number
line. The point corresponding to 0 is called the origin.

Objective 3

Inequalities
The real numbers are ordered by their size. We say that a is less than b and write a < b,
provided that b = a + c for some positive number c. We also write b > a, meaning the
same thing as a < b, and say that b is greater than a. On the real line, the numbers
increase from left to right. Consequently, a is to the left of b on the number line when
a < b. Similarly, a is to the right of b on the number line when a > b. We sometimes
want to indicate that at least one of two conditions is correct: Either a < b or a = b.
In this case, we write a ≤ b or b ≥ a. The four symbols <, >, ≤, and ≥ are called
inequality symbols.

Section P.1 The Real Numbers and Their Properties

EXAMPLE 4

7

Identifying Inequalities

SIDE NOTE

Decide whether each of the following is true or false from their position on a number line.

Notice that the inequality sign
always points to the smaller
number.

a. 5 > 0

2 < 7, 2 is smaller.
5 > 1, 1 is smaller.

b. −2 < −3

c. 2 ≤ 3

d. 4 ≤ 4

Solution
a. 5 > 0 is true because 5 is to the right of 0 on the number line. See Figure P.5.
b. −2 < −3 is false because −2 is to the right of −3 on the number line.
c. 2 ≤ 3 is true because 2 is to the left of 3 on the number line. (Recall that 2 ≤ 3 is
true if either 2 < 3 or 2 = 3.)
d. 4 ≤ 4 is true because 4 ≤ 4 is true if either 4 < 4 or 4 = 4.
22 is right of 23

23

22

21

4 5 4 5 is right of 0

2 is left of 3

0

1

2

3

4

5

Figure P.5

Practice Problem 4. Decide whether each of the following is true or false.
a. −2 < 0   b. 5 ≤ 7   c. −4 > −1 

The following properties of inequalities for real numbers are used throughout this text.
Here a, b, and c represent real numbers.
Trichotomy Property: Exactly one of the following is true:
a < b, a = b, or a > b.
Transitive Property: If a < b and b < c, then a < c.
The trichotomy property says that if two real numbers are not equal, then one is larger
than the other. The transitive property says that “less than” works like “smaller than” or
“lighter than.” Frequently, we read a > 0 as “a is positive” instead of “a is greater than 0.”
We can also read a < 0 as “a is negative.” If a ≥ 0, then either a > 0 or a = 0, and we
may say that “a is nonnegative.”

Objective 4

Sets
To specify a set, we do one of the following:
1. List the elements of the set (roster method).
2. Describe the elements of the set (often using set-builder notation).
Variables are helpful in describing sets when we use set-builder notation. The notation
{ x x is a natural number less than 6 } is in set-builder notation and describes the set
{1, 2, 3, 4, 5 } using the roster method.

We read { x x is a natural number less than 6 } as “the set of all x such that x is a
natural number less than six.” Generally, { x x has property P } designates the set of all x
such that (the vertical bar is read “such that”) x has property P.
It may happen that a description fails to describe any number. For example, consider
{ x x < 2 and x > 7 }. Of course, no number can be simultaneously less than 2 and
greater than 7, so this set has no members. We refer to a set with no elements as the empty
set, or null set, and use the special symbol ∅, or sometimes { }, to denote it.

8

Chapter P Basic Concepts of Algebra

Definition of Union and Intersection
The union of two sets A and B, denoted A ∪ B, is the set consisting of all elements that are
in A or B (or both). See Figure P.6a. The intersection of A and B, denoted A ∩ B, is the set
consisting of all elements that are in both A and B. In other words, A ∩ B consists of the
elements common to A and B. See Figure P.6b.
EXAMPLE 5
A

B

Find A ∩ B, A ∪ B, and A ∩ C , if A = { −2, −1, 0, 1, 2 }, B = { −4, −2, 0, 2, 4 }, and
C = { −3, 3 } .

(a) A ø B

A

Forming Set Unions and Intersections

Solution
A ∩ B = { −2, 0, 2 }, the set of elements common to both A and B.
A ∪ B = { −4, −2, −1, 0, 1, 2, 4 }, the set of elements that are in A or B (or both).
A∩C = ∅

B

(b) A ù B

Figure P.6 Picturing union
and intersection

Objective 5

a

b

Figure P.7

An open interval

Practice Problem 5. Find A ∩ B and A ∪ B, if A = { −3, −1, 0, 1, 3 } and
B = { −4, −2, 0, 2, 4 }.

Intervals
We now turn our attention to graphing certain sets of numbers. That is, we graph each
number in a given set. We are particularly interested in sets of real numbers, called intervals,
whose graphs correspond to special sections of the number line.
If a < b, then the set of real numbers between a and b, but not including either a or b,
is called the open interval from a to b and is denoted by ( a, b ). See Figure P.7. Using
set-builder notation, we can write
( a, b ) = { x | a < x < b } .

a

Figure P.8

b

A closed interval

a
b
Open interval (a, b)
(a)
a
b
Closed interval [a, b]
(b)

Figure P.9 Endpoint inclusion
and exclusion
2

Figure P.10
interval

An unbounded

We indicate graphically that the endpoints a and b are excluded from the open interval by
drawing a left parenthesis at a and a right parenthesis at b. These parentheses enclose the
numbers between a and b.
The closed interval from a to b is the set
[ a, b ] = { x | a ≤ x ≤ b } .

The closed interval includes both endpoints a and b. We replace the parentheses with
square brackets in the interval notation and on the graph. See Figure P.8. Sometimes we
want to include only one endpoint of an interval and exclude the other. Table P.1 below
shows how this is done.
An alternative notation for indicating whether endpoints are included uses open circles
to show exclusion and closed circles to show inclusion. See Figure P.9.
If an interval extends indefinitely in one or both directions, it is called an unbounded
interval. For example, the set of all numbers to the right of 2,
{ x | x > 2 },

is an unbounded interval denoted by ( 2, ∞ ). See Figure P.10.
The symbol ∞ (“infinity”) is not a number, but is used to indicate all numbers to the
right of 2.
The symbol −∞ is another symbol that does not represent a number. The notation
( −∞, a ) is used to indicate the set of all real numbers that are less than a. The notation
( −∞, ∞ ) represents the set of all real numbers.
Table P.1 lists various types of intervals that we use in this text. In the table, when two
points a and b are given, we assume that a < b. This is because if a > b, then ( a, b ) is
the empty set.

Section P.1 The Real Numbers and Their Properties

9

TABLE P.1
Interval Notation

SIDE NOTE
The symbols ∞ and −∞ are
always used with parentheses,
not square brackets. Also note
that < and > are used with
parentheses and that ≤ and ≥
are used with square brackets.

Set Notation

Graph

( a, b )

{ x|a < x < b }

a

b

[ a, b ]

{ x|a ≤ x ≤ b }

a

b

( a, b ]

{ x|a < x ≤ b }

a

b

[ a, b )

{ x|a ≤ x < b }

a

( a, ∞ )

{ x| x > a }

a

[ a, ∞ )

{ x| x ≥ a }

a

( −∞, b )

{ x| x < b }

( −∞, b ]

{ x| x ≤ b }

( −∞, ∞ )

{ x | x is a real number }

EXAMPLE 6

b

b
b

Union and Intersection of Intervals

Consider the two intervals I 1 = ( −3, 4 ) and I 2 = [ 2, 6 ].
Find:

a. I 1 ∪ I 2 .    b. I 1 ∩ I 2 .

Use the to ( exclude −3 .
Use the ] to include 6.
Solution
a. From Figure P.11, we see that I 1 ∪ I 2 = ( −3, 6 ]. We note that every number in the
interval ( −3, 6 ] is in either I 1 or I 2 or in both I 1 and I 2 .
b. We see in Figure P.11 that I 1 ∩ I 2 = [ 2, 4 ). Every number in the interval [ 2, 4 ) is in
both I 1 and I 2 . Notice that while 4 is in I 2, 4 is not in I 1.
I1

I2

24

23

22

21

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

24

23

22

21

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Figure P.11

Practice Problem 6. Let I 1 = ( −∞, 5 ) and I 2 = [ −2, ∞ ). Find the following.
a. I 1 ∪ I 2     b. I 1 ∩ I 2 

Objective 6

Absolute Value
The absolute value of a number a, denoted by a , is the distance between the origin and the
point on the number line with coordinate a. The point with coordinate −3 is 3 units from the
origin, so we write −3 = 3 and say that the absolute value of −3 is 3. See Figure P.12.
3 units
23

22

Figure P.12

21

0

Absolute value

1

10

Chapter P Basic Concepts of Algebra

Absolute Value
For any real number a, the absolute value of a, denoted a , is defined by
a = a if a ≥ 0

EXAMPLE 7

SIDE NOTE
Finding the absolute value
requires knowing whether the
number or expression inside
the absolute value bars is
positive, zero, or negative. If it is
positive or zero, you can simply
remove the absolute value
bars. If it is negative, you
remove the bars and change
the sign of the number or
expression inside the absolute
value bars.

and

a = −a if a < 0.

Determining Absolute Value

Find the value of each of the following expressions.
a.

4

−4

b.

c.

( −3 ) + 1

d.

0

Solution
Because the number inside the absolute value bars is 4 and 4 ≥ 0,
just remove the absolute value bars.

a.

4 = 4

b.

−4 = −( −4 ) = 4

c.

0 = 0

d.

Because the number inside the absolute value bars is −4
and −4 < 0, remove the bars and change the sign.

Because the number inside the absolute value bars is 0 and 0 ≥ 0,
just remove the absolute value bars.
( − 3 ) + 1 = −2
Because the expression inside the absolute value
bars is (−3) + 1 = −2 and −2 < 0, remove the
= −( −2 ) = 2
bars and change the sign.

Practice Problem 7. Find the value of each of the following.
a.
WARNING

TECHNOLOGY CONNECTION
The absolute value function on
your graphing calculator will
find the value of the expression
entered and then compute its
absolute value. The first screen
is in CLASSIC mode.

−10

3−4

b.

c.

2 ( −3 ) + 7





The absolute value of a number represents a distance. Because distance can never be negative,
the absolute value of a number a is never negative. So, a ≥ 0. However, if a is not 0, − a is always
negative. Thus, − 5.3 = −5.3, − −4 = −4, and − 1.18 = −1.18.

Distance Between Two Points on a Real Number Line
The absolute value is used to define the distance between two points on a number line.
Distance Formula on a Number Line
If a and b are the coordinates of two points on a number line, then the distance
between a and b, denoted by d ( a, b ), is a − b . In symbols, d ( a, b ) = a − b .

EXAMPLE 8

Finding the Distance Between Two Points

Find the distance between −3 and 4 on the number line.

Solution
Figure P.13 shows that the distance between −3 and 4 is 7 units. The distance formula gives
the same answer.
d ( −3, 4 ) = −3 − 4 = −7 = −( −7 ) = 7.
3 units
23

22

Figure P.13

21

4 units
0
1
3 1 4 5 7 units

2

Distance on the number line

3

4

Section P.1 The Real Numbers and Their Properties

a

b

Figure P.14

11

Notice that reversing the order of −3 and 4 in this computation gives the same answer. That
is, the distance between 4 and −3 is 4 −( −3 ) = 4 + 3 = 7 = 7. It is always true
that a − b = b − a . See Figure P.14.
Practice Problem 8. Find the distance between −7 and 2 on the number line.
We summarize the properties of absolute value next.
Properties of Absolute Value
If a and b are any real numbers, the following properties apply.
Property

Objective 7

Example

1. a ≥ 0

−5 = 5 and 5 ≥ 0

2. a = −a

3 = −3

3. ab = a b

3( −5 ) = 3 −5

a
a
4. b = b , b ≠ 0

−7
−7
=
3
3

5. a − b = b − a

2−7 = 7−2

6. a ≤ a

−2 ≤ −2 , 3 ≤ 3

7.  a + b ≤ a + b
(the triangle inequality)

−2 + 5 ≤ −2 + 5

Order of Operations
When we write numbers in a meaningful combination of the basic operations of arithmetic,
the result is called an arithmetic expression. The real number that results from performing all operations in the expression is called the value of the expression. In arithmetic and
algebra, parentheses ( ) are grouping symbols used to indicate which operations are to be
performed first. Other common grouping symbols are square brackets [ ], braces { }, fraction bars − or /, and absolute value bars .
Evaluating (finding the value of) arithmetic expressions requires carefully applying the
following conventions for the order in which the operations are performed.

SIDE NOTE

The Order of Operations

You can remember the order of
operations by the acronym
PEMDAS (Please Excuse My
Dear Aunt Sally):

Step 1
Step 2

Parentheses
Exponents
Multiplication
Division
Addition
Subtraction.

Step 3
Step 4
Step 5

Whenever a fraction bar is encountered, work separately above and below it.
When parentheses or other grouping symbols are present, start inside
the innermost pair of grouping symbols and work outward.
Do operations involving exponents.
Do multiplications and divisions in the order in which they occur,
working from left to right.
Do additions and subtractions in the order in which they occur, working
from left to right.

EXAMPLE 9

Evaluating Arithmetic Expressions

Use order of operations to evaluate each of the following.
a. 3 ⋅ 2 5 + 4

b. 5 − ( 3 − 1 ) 2

12

Chapter P Basic Concepts of Algebra

TECHNOLOGY CONNECTION

Solution

The order of operations is built
into your graphing calculator.

a. 3 ⋅ 2 5 + 4 = 3 ⋅ 32 + 4
= 96 + 4
= 100

Do operations involving exponents first, 2 5 = 32.
Multiplication is done next, 3 ⋅ 32 = 96.
Addition is done next, 96 + 4 = 100.

b. 5 − ( 3 − 1 ) 2 = 5 − ( 2 ) 2

Work inside the parentheses first, 3 − 1 = 2.

=5−4

Next, do operations involving exponents, 2 2 = 4.

=1

Subtraction is done next, 5 − 4 = 1.

Practice Problem 9. Evaluate.
a. ( −3 ) ⋅ 5 + 20

b. 5 − 12 ÷ 6 ⋅ 2
2
d. −3 + ( x − 4 ) for x = 6 

Objective 8

c.

9−1
−5⋅7
4

Properties of the Real Numbers
When doing arithmetic, we intuitively use important properties of the real numbers. We
know, for example, that if we add or multiply two real numbers, the result is a real number.
This fact is known as the closure property of real numbers. For each property listed below,
a, b, and c represent real numbers.

Properties of the Real Numbers
Name

Closure

Addition (A)

a + b is a real number

Multiplication (M)

Examples

a ⋅ b is a real number

A: 1 + 2 is a real number.
M: 2 ⋅ π is a real number.

Commutative a + b = b + a

a⋅b = b⋅a

Associative

(a + b) + c = a + (b + c)

( a ⋅ b ) ⋅ c = a ⋅ ( b ⋅ c)

Identity

There is a unique real
number 0, called the additive
identity, such that a + 0 = a
and 0 + a = a.

There is a unique real number 1,
called the multiplicative
identity, such that a ⋅ 1 = a
and 1 ⋅ a = a.

A: 4 + 7 = 7 + 4
M: 3 ⋅ 8 = 8 ⋅ 3
A: (2 + 1) + 7 = 2 + (1 + 7)
M: ( 5 ⋅ 9 ) ⋅ 13 = 5 ⋅ ( 9 ⋅ 13 )
A: 3 + 0 = 3 and 0 + 3 = 3
M: 7 ⋅ 1 = 7 and 1 ⋅ 7 = 7

Inverse

There is a unique real number
−a, called the opposite of a,
such that a + ( −a ) = 0 and
( −a ) + a = 0.

If a ≠ 0, there is a unique real A: 5 + (−5) = 0 and
(
)
1
number , called the reciprocal    −5 + 5 = 0
a
1
1
1
M: 4 ⋅ = 1 and ⋅ 4 = 1
of a, such that a ⋅ = 1 and
4
4
a
1
⋅ a = 1.
a

Distributive

Multiplication distributes
over addition.

a ⋅ (b + c) = a ⋅ b + a ⋅ c
(a + b) ⋅ c = a ⋅ c + b ⋅ c

3 ⋅ ( 2 + 5) = 3 ⋅ 2 + 3 ⋅ 5

( 2 + 5) ⋅ 3 = 2 ⋅ 3 + 5 ⋅ 3

Two other useful properties of 0 involve multiplication rather than addition.
Zero-Product Properties
0 ⋅ a = 0 and a ⋅ 0 = 0
If a ⋅ b = 0, then a = 0 or b = 0.

Section P.1 The Real Numbers and Their Properties
TECHNOLOGY CONNECTION
On your graphing calculator,
the opposite of a is denoted
with a shorter horizontal
hyphen than that used to
denote subtraction. It is also
placed somewhat higher than
the subtraction symbol.

13

Subtraction and Division of Real Numbers
You may have noticed that all of the properties discussed to this point apply to the operations of addition and multiplication. What about subtraction and division? We see next that
subtraction and division can be defined in terms of addition and multiplication.
Subtraction of the number b from the number a is defined with the use of a and −b; to
subtract b from a, add the opposite of b to a.
Subtraction
a − b = a + ( −b )
If a and b are real numbers and b ≠ 0, division of a by b is defined with the use of a
1
and ; to divide a by b, multiply a by the reciprocal of b.
b
Division
If b ≠ 0,

a÷b =

1
a
= a⋅
b
b

a
is undefined.
0
a
is called the quotient, “the ratio of a to b,” or the fraction with numerator
b
a and denominator b. Here are some useful properties involving opposites, subtraction,
and division.
Throughout, we assume that the denominator of each fraction is nonzero.

For b ≠ 0,

Properties of Opposites
( − 1 ) a = −a

−( −a ) = a

( −a ) b = a ( −b ) = −( ab )

( −a )( −b ) = ab

−( a + b ) = −a − b
−a
a
=
−b
b

−( a − b ) = b − a

−a
a
a
=
= −
b
b
−b

a ( b − c ) = ab − ac

To combine real numbers by means of the division operation, we use the following properties. We write “x ± y” as shorthand for “x + y or x − y .”
Properties of Fractions
All denominators are assumed to be nonzero.
a
b
a ± b
± =
c
c
c
a c
ac
⋅ =
b d
bd
ac
a
=
bc
b

a
c
ad ± bc
±
=
b
d
bd
a
c
a d
÷
= ⋅
b
d
b c
a
c
means a ⋅ d = b ⋅ c
=
b
d

ac
a
a
ac
= , equivalently =
, can be used to produce a common denominator
bc
b
b
bc
when adding or subtracting fractions.
The property

14

Chapter P Basic Concepts of Algebra

EXAMPLE 10

Adding, Subtracting, Multiplying, and Dividing Fractions

Perform the indicated operations.
5
3
+
a.
3
2
SIDE NOTE
Part a of Example 10 can also
be done as follows:
5
3
5⋅2+3⋅3
+ =
3
2
3⋅2
a
c
ad ± bc
±
=
b
d
bd
directly. Part b can be done
similarly.
using

5
2
−
b.
6
3

4 15
⋅
c.
3 8

d.

2
5
9
25

d.

5
8 
15
16

Solution
a
ac
a. 5 + 3 = 5 ⋅ 2 + 3 ⋅ 3
Using
=
3
2
3⋅2
2⋅3
b
bc
5⋅2+3⋅3
19
a+b
a
b
Using + =
=
=
3⋅2
6
c
c
c
5
2
5
2⋅2
a
ac
b.
Using
− = −
=
6
3
6
3⋅2
b
bc
5−2⋅2
1
a−b
a
b
Using − =
=
=
6
6
c
c
c
a⋅c
a c
c. 4 ⋅ 15 = 4 ⋅ 15
Using ⋅ =
3 8
3⋅8
b⋅d
b d
4 ⋅ 3 ⋅5
5
a⋅c
a
Using
=
=
=
3 ⋅ 4 ⋅2
2
b⋅c
b
2
2 25
a
c
a d
d.     5 = ⋅
Using ÷ = ⋅
9
5 9
b
d
b c
25
2 ⋅ 25
a⋅c
a c
Using ⋅ =
=
5⋅9
b⋅d
b d
2⋅ 5 ⋅5
10
a⋅c
a
Using
=
=
=
5 ⋅9
9
b⋅c
b
Practice Problem 10. Perform the indicated operations.
7
3
a.
+
4
8

Objective 9

8
2
b.
−
3
5

9 7
c.
⋅
14 3

Algebraic Expressions
In algebra, any number, constant, variable, or parenthetical group (or any product of them)
is called a term. A combination of terms using the ordinary operations of addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division (as well as exponentiation and roots, which are discussed later in this chapter) is called an algebraic expression, or simply an expression. If
we replace each variable in an expression with a specific number and get a real number, the
resulting number is called the value of the algebraic expression. Of course, this value
depends on the numbers we use to replace the variables in the expression. Here are some
examples of algebraic expressions:
x−2

WARNING

1
+
x

7

10
y+3

x + y ÷5

Incorrect
5( x + 1 ) = 5 x + 1

Correct
5( x + 1 ) = 5 x + 5

( 13 x )( 13 y ) = 13 xy

( 13 x )( 13 y ) = 19 xy

x − ( 4y + 3) = x − 4y + 3

x − ( 4y + 3) = x − 4y − 3

Section P.1 The Real Numbers and Their Properties

EXAMPLE 11

15

Evaluating an Algebraic Expression

Evaluate the following expressions for the given values of the variables.
a. [ ( 9 + x ) ÷ 7 ] ⋅ 3 − x
for x = 5
2
b. x −
for x = 2 and y = −2
y

Solution
a. [ ( 9 + x ) ÷ 7 ] ⋅ 3 − x = [ ( 9 + 5 ) ÷ 7 ] ⋅ 3 − 5

b.

2
2
x − = 2 −
y
−2
=2−

2
−2

Replace x with 5.

= [ 14 ÷ 7 ] ⋅ 3 − 5

Work inside the parentheses.

= 2⋅3−5

Work inside the brackets.

=6−5

Multiply.

=1

The value of the expression

Replace x with 2 and y with −2.
Eliminate the absolute value, 2 = 2.

= 2+1

2
= −1; division occurs before subtraction.
−2
−( −1 ) = 1

=3

The value of the expression

= 2 − ( −1 )

Practice Problem 11. Evaluate.
a. ( x − 2 ) ÷ 3 + x

EXAMPLE 12

b. 7 −

for x = 3

x
y

for x = −1, y = 3 

Finding the Temperature from Cricket Chirps

Write an algebraic expression for converting cricket chirps to degrees Celsius. Assuming
that you count 48 chirps in 25 seconds, what is the Celsius temperature?

Solution
Recall from the introduction to this section that to convert cricket chirps to degrees
Celsius, you count the chirps in 25 seconds, divide by 3, and then add 4 to get the
temperature.
Temperature in
degrees Celsius

=

( Number of chirps3 in 25 seconds ) + 4

If we let C = temperature in degrees Celsius and N = number of chirps in 25 seconds,
we get the expression
C =

N
+ 4.
3

Suppose we count 48 chirps in 25 seconds. The Celsius temperature is
48
+4
3
= 16 + 4 = 20 degrees.

C =

Practice Problem 12. Use the temperature expression in Example 12 to find the Celsius
temperature, assuming that 39 chirps are counted in 25 seconds.

16

Chapter P Basic Concepts of Algebra

P.1

Exercises

Concepts and Vocabulary
1. Whole numbers are formed by adding the number
to the set of natural numbers.
2. The number −3 is an integer, but it is also a ( n )
and a ( n )
.

35. integers

36. rational numbers

37. irrational numbers

38. real numbers

4. If a real number is not a rational number, it is a ( n )
number.

In Exercises 39–50, each expression contains a base with an
exponent greater than 1. Name the exponent and the base and
evaluate the expression.
2 3
40. 5 4
41.
39. 10 3
3

5. True or False. If −x is positive, then −x > 0.

42.

−5
1
< −2
2
2
7. True or False. The sum of two rational numbers is a rational
number.

45. 2 ⋅ 3 4

46. 5 ⋅

48. −3 ⋅ ( −2 ) 4

49. −3 ⋅ ( −2 ) 5

3. If a < b, then a is to the
number line.

of b on the

6. True or False.

8. True or False. The sum of two irrational numbers is
always an irrational number.

Building Skills

( )

( 25 )

4

52. −3 is less than −2.

4
11. −
5

56. x − 1 is greater than 2.

13.

3
11

14.

11
33

15.

95
30

16.

41
15

20. 9.6

21. 2.13

22. 3.23

23. 4.523

24. 1.4235

In Exercises 25–32, classify each of the following numbers as
rational or irrational.
25. −207
26. −114

31.

12

28. − 25
30. −

15
12

32.

3

{

17
3, 2, 10,
, 11
4

55. 5 is less than or equal to 2 x.

In Exercises 61–64, fill in the blank with one of the symbols
= , <, or > to produce a true statement.
24
62. −5 _______ −2
61. 4 _______
6
9
1
63. −4 _______ 0
64. − _______ −4
2
2
In Exercises 65–72, find each set if A = { −4, −2, 0, 2, 4 } ,
B = { −3, 0, 1, 2, 3, 4 } , and C = { −4, −3, −2, −1, 0, 2 } .
65. A ∪ B
66. A ∩ B
67. A ∩ C

68. B ∪ C

69. ( B ∩ C ) ∪ A

70. ( A ∪ C ) ∩ B

71. ( A ∪ B ) ∩ C

72. ( A ∪ B ) ∪ C

In Exercises 73–80, find the union and the intersection of the
given pairs of intervals.
73. I 1 = ( −2, 3 ]; I 2 = [ 1, 5 )

In Exercises 33–38, list all the elements of the set
12
A = −19, − , 0,
3
that are
33. natural numbers

1
1
is greater than or equal to .
2
2
54. x is less than x + 1.
53.

60. 2 x + 3 is not greater than 5.

19. −5.3

7
2

50. −5 ⋅ ( −3 ) 2

59. 2 x + 7 is less than or equal to 14.

18. −2.35

29.

47. −2 ⋅ 3 4

58. x is negative.

17. 3.75

81

3

4

57. −x is positive.

In Exercises 17–24, convert each decimal to a quotient of two
integers in lowest terms.

27.

( 13 )

44. −

In Exercises 51–60, use inequality symbols to write the given
statements symbolically.
51. 3 is greater than −2.

In Exercises 9–16, write each of the following rational numbers as a decimal and state whether the decimal is repeating
or terminating.
1
2
9.
10.
3
3
3
12. −
12

( 12 )

43. ( −2 )3

}

34. whole numbers

74. I 1 = [ 1, 7 ]; I 2 = ( 3, 5 )
75. I 1 = ( −6, 2 ); I 2 = [ 2, 10 )
76. I 1 = ( −∞, −3 ]; I 2 = ( −3, ∞ )
77. I 1 = ( −∞, 5 ); I 2 = [ 2, ∞ )

Section P.1 The Real Numbers and Their Properties
78. I 1 = ( −2, ∞ ); I 2 = ( 0, ∞ )
79.

I 1 = ( −∞, 3 ) ∪ [ 5, ∞ ); I 2

126. x ( 2 + y ) + 0 = x ( 2 + y )

= [ −1, 7 ]

127. ( x + 5 ) + 2 y = x + ( 5 + 2 y )

80. I 1 = ( −∞, 2 ) ∪ ( 6, ∞ ); I 2 = [ −3, 0 ]

128. ( 3 + x ) + 5 = x + ( 3 + 5 )

In Exercises 81–92, rewrite each expression without absolute
value bars.
81. −4
82. − −17

In Exercises 129–150, perform the indicated operations.

5
−7

83.

85. 5 −

2−5

86.

3−2

87.

−3
5

84.
2

88. 3 − π

8
89.
−8

90.

−8
8

91. 5 − −7 ||

92.

4−7

In Exercises 93–100, use the absolute value to express the
distance between the points with coordinates a and b on
the number line. Then determine this distance by evaluating
the absolute value expression.
93. a = 3 and b = 8
94. a = 2 and b = 14
95. a = −6 and b = 9

96. a = −12 and b = 3

97. a = −20 and b = −6
22
4
99. a =
and b = −
7
7

98. a = −14 and b = −1
16
3
100. a =
and b = −
5
5

In Exercises 101–108, graph each of the given intervals on a
number line and write the inequality notation for each.
101. ( −3, 1 ]
102. [ −6, −2 )
103. [ −3, ∞ )

104. [ 0, ∞ )

105. ( −∞, 5 ]
3 9
107. − ,
4 4

106. ( −∞, −1 ]
1
108. −3, −
2

(

)

(

)

In Exercises 109–112, use the distributive property to write
each expression without parentheses.
109. 4 ( x + 1 )
110. ( −3 )( 2 − x )
111. 5( x − y + 1 )

112. 2( 3 x + 5 − y )

In Exercises 113–116, find the additive inverse and reciprocal
of each number.
Number

Additive Inverse

Reciprocal

113. 5
114. − 2
3

116. 1.7

119. ( x + 2 ) = 1 ⋅ ( x + 2 )

120. 3a = 1 ⋅ 3a

121. 7( xy ) = ( 7 x ) y

122. 3 ⋅ ( 6 x ) = ( 3 ⋅ 6 ) x

125. ( 3 + x ) + 0 = 3 + x

143.

8
5
16
15

7
3
+
10
4
9
5
132. +
2
12
8
2
134.
+
15
9
7
1
136. −
8
5
5
7
138. −
8 12
1
1
140. −
4
6
9 14
142. ⋅
7 27
130.

144.

5
6
15
6

7
8
145.
21
16

3
10
146.
7
15

3
1
−
10
2
2
1
149. 3 ⋅
−
15
3

148. 2 ⋅

147. 5 ⋅

7
3
−
2
2
5
3
150. 2 ⋅ −
3
2

In Exercises 151–160, evaluate each expression for x = 3 and
y = −5.
151. 2( x + y ) − 3 y
152. −2( x + y ) + 5 y
153. 3 x − 2 y
x − 3y
155.
+ xy
2
2( 1 − 2 x ) ( )
157.
− −x y
y
14
1
+
2
x
159.
−y
4

154. 7 x − y
y+3
− xy
x
3( 2 − x ) (
158.
− 1 − xy )
y

156.

4
8
+
−y
x
160.
y
2

162. ( x + 2 )( x + 3 ) = x + 2 x + 3

In Exercises 117–128, name the property of real numbers that
justifies the given equality. All variables represent real numbers.
117. ( −7 ) + 7 = 0
118. 5 + ( −5 ) = 0

( )

3
4
+
5
3
6
5
131.
+
5
7
5
3
133.
+
6
10
5
9
135. −
8 10
5
7
137.
−
9 11
2
1
139.
−
5
2
3 8
141.
⋅
4 27
129.

In Exercises 161–170, correct the error in each formula.
x
x
x
+ =
161.
( y + 3)
3
y

115. 0

3 2
123.
=1
2 3

17

124. 2

( 12 ) = 1

163. 5( x + 3 ) = 5 x + 3
164. ( 25 x )( 4 x ) = 100 x
165. x − ( 3 y + 2 ) = x − 3 y + 2
166. 2 x − ( 4 y − 5 ) = 2 x − 4 y − 5
x+ y
= 1+ y
167.
x
x+ y
y
= 1+
168.
x+ z
z

18

Chapter P Basic Concepts of Algebra

169. ( x + 1 )( y + 1 ) = xy + 1

by each of the following 20-year-old people and the ideal
exercise heart rate. Then evaluate that expression.
a. Latasha: 124 beats per minute
b. Frances: 137 beats per minute
c. Ignacio: 114 beats per minute

1
1
170. x =
1
xy
y
171. Let P and Q be two points on a number line with coordinates a and b, respectively. Show that the point M on the
a+b
is the midpoint of the
number line with coordinate
2
line segment PQ. [Hint: Show that d ( P, M ) = d ( Q, M ).]
4
7
172. Find 100 rational numbers between − and .
13
13
4
40
7
70
(Hint: −
= −
and
=
;
13
130
13
130
−40 < −31 < −30 < . . . < 0 < 1 < . . . < 69.)

Applying the Concepts
173. Media players. Let A = the set of people who own MP3
players and B = the set of people who own DVD players.
a. Describe the set A ∪ B.
b. Describe the set A ∩ B.
174. Optional car features. The table below indicates whether
certain features are offered for each of three types of 2021 cars.
Android
Auto

Manual
Transmission

Apple
CarPlay

Ford Bronco

yes

yes

yes

Honda Accord

yes

no

yes

Audi A4

no

no

yes

Source: http://motortrend.com
Use the roster method to describe each of the following sets.
a. A = cars which offer Android Auto
b. B = cars which offer manual transmission
c. C = cars which offer Apple CarPlay
d. A ∩ B
e. A ∩ C
f. A ∪ B
g. A ∪ C
175. Blood pressure. A group of college students had systolic
blood pressure readings that ranged from a low value of
119.5 to a high value of 134.5 inclusive. Let x represent the
value of the systolic-blood pressure readings. Use inequalities to describe this range of values and graph the corresponding interval on a number line.
176. Population projections. Population projections suggest
that by 2060, the number of people 65 years and older in
the United States will be about 95 million. In 2020, the
number of people 65 years and older in the United States
was 49 million. Let x represent the number (in millions) of
people in the United States who are 65 years and older. Use
inequalities to describe this population range from 2020
to 2060 and graph the corresponding interval on a number
line. (Source: U.S. Census Bureau)
177. Heart rate. For exercise to be most beneficial, the optimum heart rate for a 20-year-old person is 120 beats per
minute. Use absolute value notation to write an expression
that describes the difference between the heart rate achieved

178. Streaming music and video. Normal-quality music
streaming uses 72MB per hour on average, and standard
definition video uses about 700MB per hour on average. Use
absolute value notation to write an expression that describes
the difference between this average time and the actual time
Dewayne used to stream some music and video. Then evaluate that expression. (Source: https://www.androidcentral.com)
a. The music used 56MB per hour.
b. The video used 380MB per hour.
179. Use the formula from Example 12 for finding the temperature in degrees Celsius from the number of cricket chirps
counted in 25 seconds to find the Celsius temperature if you
count 42 chirps in 25 seconds.
180. Use the formula from Example 12 for finding the temperature in degrees Celsius from the number of cricket chirps
counted in 25 seconds to find number of chirps that would be
counted if the Celsius temperature is 22 degrees.
Negative calories. In Exercises 181 and 182, use the fact that
eating 100 grams of broccoli (a negative calorie food) actually
results in a net loss of 55 calories.
181. If a cheeseburger has 522.5 calories, how many grams of
broccoli would a person have to consume to have a net gain
of zero calories?
182. Maria ate 600 grams of broccoli and now wants to eat just
enough French fries to get a net calorie intake of zero. If a small
order of fries has 165 calories, how many orders are required?

Beyond the Basics
In Exercises 183–190, state whether each statement is true or
false. Justify your assertion.
183. The opposite of an irrational number is also an irrational
number.
184. The sum of a rational number and an irrational number is
an irrational number.
185. a. The product of a rational number and an irrational number
is an irrational number.
b. If your answer to part(a) is “false,” modify the statement
to make it a true statement.
186. The product of two irrational numbers is an irrational number.
187. The difference of two irrational numbers is an irrational
number.
188. The quotient of two irrational numbers is an irrational number.
189. The product of two rational numbers is a rational number.
190. The quotient of two rational numbers is a rational number.
In Exercises 191 and 192, use the following definition: An
integer p is even if p = 2 n for some integer n; an integer q is
odd if q = 2 k + 1 , for some integer k.
191. a. Show that if an integer a is odd, then a 2 is also an odd integer.
b. Show that if b 2 is an even integer, then b is also an even
integer.
192. Show that if p 2 = 2q 2 for two integers p and q, then q is
an even integer.

Section P.2 Integer Exponents and Scientific Notation

GETTING READY

for the Next Section

REVIEW CONCEPTS

GR3. a. ( a 2 )3

Variables (Section P.1, page 2)

b. ( a 4 ) 2

c. ( a m ) n

Properties of opposites (Section P.1, page 13)

GR4. a. ( ab ) 2

b. ( ab ) 4

c. ( ab ) n

REVIEW SKILLS
Integer exponents (Section P.1, page 5)
In Exercises GR1–GR4, use the rules of exponents to simplify
each expression. Here a, b, m, and n are natural numbers.
GR1. a. a 2 ⋅ a 3
b. a 4 ⋅ a 7
c. a m ⋅ a n
b3
b7
GR2. a.
b. 3
b
b
bm
c. n
b

P.2

Arithmetic of fractions (Section P.1, pages 13 and 14)
In Exercises GR5–GR8, perform the indicated operation.
7
3
3
2
GR5. +
GR6. −
3
2
6
3
3
12
3 12
GR7. ⋅
GR8. ÷
2 7
5
15

Integer Exponents and
Scientific Notation
Objectives

Videos for
this Section

1

Use integer exponents.

2

Use the rules of exponents.

3

Simplify exponential expressions.

4

Use scientific notation.

Coffee and Candy Consumption in America
In 2020, Americans drank about 146 billion
cups of coffee and spent more than $21 billion
on candy and snacks. The American population at that time was about 328 million. Because
our day-to-day activities bring us into contact
with more manageable quantities, most
people find large numbers like those just cited
a bit difficult to understand. Using exponents,
the method of scientific notation allows us to
write large and small quantities in a manner
that makes comparing such quantities fairly
easy. In turn, these comparisons help us get a
better perspective on these quantities. In
Example 9 of this section, without relying on
a calculator, we see that if we distribute the
cost of the candy and snacks used in 2020
evenly among all individuals in the United
States, each person will spend over $64. Distributing the coffee used in 2020 evenly
among all individuals in the United States
gives each person about 445 cups of coffee.

19

20

Chapter P Basic Concepts of Algebra

Objective 1

Integer Exponents
In Section P.1, we introduced the following notation:
If a is a real number and n is a positive integer, then
a n = a
⋅ a ⋅. 
. . ⋅ a.
n factors

We now define a n when the exponent is 0 or a negative integer.
SIDE NOTE
The laws of exponents suggest
why, for a ≠ 0, a 0 = 1.
2 0 = 2 1−1 = 2 ⋅ 2 −1 =
1
2
2⋅ =
=1
2
2

WARNING

Zero and Negative Integer Exponents
For any nonzero number a and any positive integer n,
a 0 = 1 and a −n =

1
.
an

Negative exponents indicate the reciprocal of a number. Zero cannot be used as a base with a
negative exponent because zero does not have a reciprocal. Furthermore, 0 0 is not defined.
We assume throughout this text that the base is not equal to zero if any of the exponents are
negative or zero.

EXAMPLE 1

Evaluating Expressions That Use Zero or Negative Exponents

Evaluate.
a. ( −5 )−2

b. −5 −2

c. 8 0

d.

−3

( 23 )

Solution
a. ( −5 )−2 =
b. −5 −2 = −
c. 8 0 = 1
2 −3
=
d.
3

( )

1
( −5 ) 2

=

1
25

The exponent −2 applies to the base −5.

1
1
= −
The exponent −2 applies to the base 5.
52
25
By definition
1
27
1
2 3
2 2 2
8
= ⋅ ⋅ =
3 = 8 =
2
3
3 3 3
27
8
27
3

( )

( )

Practice Problem 1. Evaluate.
a. 2 −1

b.

( 45 )

0

c.

−2

( 32 ) 



In Example 1, we see that parts a and b give different results. In part a, the base is −5
and the exponent is −2, whereas in part b, we evaluate the opposite of the expression with
base 5 and exponent −2.

Objective 2

Rules of Exponents
We now review the rules of exponents.
Let’s see what happens when we multiply a 5 by a 3 . We have
a 5 ⋅ a 3 = (
a ⋅ a ⋅
a 
⋅ a ⋅ a ) ⋅ (
a ⋅
a 
⋅ a) = a
⋅ a ⋅ a ⋅ a⋅ 
a ⋅ a ⋅ a ⋅ a = a 8 .
5 factors

3 factors

5 + 3 = 8 factors

Section P.2 Integer Exponents and Scientific Notation

21

Similarly, if you multiply m factors of a by n factors of a, you get m + n factors of a.
Product Rule of Exponents
If a is a real number and m and n are integers, then

RECALL

a m ⋅ a n = a m+ n .

When using the product rule,
remember that a must be
nonzero if the exponent is zero
or negative.

To multiply exponential expressions with the same base, keep the base and add
exponents.

EXAMPLE 2

Using the Product Rule of Exponents

Simplify. Use the product rule and (if necessary) the definition of a negative exponent or
reciprocal to write each answer without negative exponents.
a. 2 x 3 ⋅ x 5

b. x 7 ⋅ x −7

c. ( −4 y 2 )( 3 y 7 )

Solution
a. 2 x 3 ⋅ x 5 = 2 x 3 + 5 = 2 x 8
Add exponents: 3 + 5 = 8.
( −7 )
7
−
7
7
+
0
b. x ⋅ x
= x
= x = 1
Add exponents: 7 + ( −7 ) = 0; simplify.
2
7
2
7
Group the factors with variable bases.
c. ( −4 y )( 3 y ) = ( −4 ) 3 y y
= −12 y 2 + 7

Add exponents.

= −12 y 9

2+7 = 9

Practice Problem 2. Simplify. Write each answer without using negative exponents.
a. x 2 ⋅ 3 x 7

b. ( 2 2 x 3 )( 4 x −3 ) 





Look what happens when we divide a 5 by a 3 . We have
a ⋅ a ⋅ a a⋅a
a5
a⋅a⋅a⋅a⋅a
=
=
⋅
= a ⋅ a = a 2.
a3
a⋅a⋅a
a ⋅ a ⋅ a
1
a5
1
= a 5 ⋅ 3 = a 5 ⋅ a −3 = a 5 − 3 = a 2 . You subtract exponents because the three
3
a
a
factors in the denominator eliminate three of the factors in the numerator.

So

Quotient Rule for Exponents
If a is a nonzero real number and m and n are integers, then
am
= a m− n .
an
To divide two exponential expressions with the same base, keep the base and subtract
exponents.
SIDE NOTE
Remember that if a ≠ 0, then
a 0 = 1; so it is okay for a
denominator to contain a
nonzero base with a zero
exponent. For example,
3
3
=
= 3.
50
1

EXAMPLE 3

Using the Quotient Rule of Exponents

Simplify. Use the quotient rule to write each answer without negative exponents.
a.

510
510

b.

2 −1
23

c.

x −3
x5

22

Chapter P Basic Concepts of Algebra

Solution
510
a. 10 = 510 −10 = 5 0 = 1
5
2 −1
1
1
b.
= 2 − 1− 3 = 2 − 4 = 4 =
23
2
16
x −3
1
c.
= x −3 − 5 = x −8 = 8
x5
x
Practice Problem 3. Simplify. Write each answer without negative exponents.
34
5
2x 3
b. −2
c.



a. 0
3
5
3 x −4
To introduce the next rule of exponents, we consider ( 2 3 ) 4 .
( 23 )

4

= 23 ⋅ 23 ⋅ 23 ⋅ 23

a 4 = a ⋅ a ⋅ a ⋅ a; here a = 2 3.

= ( 2 ⋅ 2 ⋅ 2 )( 2 ⋅ 2 ⋅ 2 )( 2 ⋅ 2 ⋅ 2 )( 2 ⋅ 2 ⋅ 2 )

12 factors of 2

= 2 12
So ( 2 3 ) 4 = 2 3⋅4 = 2 12.
This suggests the following rule.

Power-of-a-Power Rule for Exponents
If a is a real number and m and n are integers, then
(am )

n

= a mn .

To find the power of a power, keep the base and multiply exponents.

EXAMPLE 4

Using the Power-of-a-Power Rule of Exponents

Simplify. Write each answer without negative exponents.
a. ( 5 2 ) 0

b. [ ( −3 ) 2 ]3

c. ( x 3 )−1

d. ( x −2 )−3

Solution
a. ( 5 2 ) 0 = 5 2 ⋅ 0 = 5 0 = 1
b. [ ( −3 ) 2 ]3 = ( −3 ) 2 ⋅ 3 = ( −3 )6 = 729  For ( −3 )6 , the base is − 3.
1
c. ( x 3 )−1 = x 3( −1) = x −3 = 3
x
d. ( x −2 )−3 = x ( −2 )( −3 ) = x 6
Practice Problem 4. Simplify. Write each answer without negative exponents.
a. ( 7 −5 ) 0

b. ( 7 0 )−5

c. ( x −1 )8

d. ( x −2 )−5

We now consider the power of a product.
( 2 ⋅ 3 ) 5 = ( 2 ⋅ 3 )( 2 ⋅ 3 )( 2 ⋅ 3 )( 2 ⋅ 3 )( 2 ⋅ 3 )

= ( 2 ⋅ 2 ⋅ 2 ⋅ 2 ⋅ 2 )( 3 ⋅ 3 ⋅ 3 ⋅ 3 ⋅ 3 )
= 25 ⋅ 35
So ( 2 ⋅ 3 ) 5 = 2 5 ⋅ 3 5.

a 5 = a ⋅ a ⋅ a ⋅ a ⋅ a; here a = 2 ⋅ 3.
Use associative and commutative properties.

Section P.2 Integer Exponents and Scientific Notation

23

This suggests the following rule.

Power-of-a-Product Rule
If a and b are real numbers and n is an integer, then
( a ⋅ b )n = a n ⋅ b n .

EXAMPLE 5

Using the Power-of-a-Product Rule

Simplify. Use the power-of-a-product rule to write each expression without negative
exponents.
a. ( 3 x ) 2

c. ( −3 2 )3

b. ( −3 x )−2

e. ( x 2 y )3

d. ( xy )−4

Solution
a. ( 3 x ) 2 = 3 2 x 2 = 9 x 2   Note that ( 3 x ) 2 ≠ 3 x 2
1
1
1
b. ( −3 x )−2 =
=
= 2   Negative exponents denote reciprocals.
( −3 x ) 2
( −3 ) 2 x 2
9x
c. ( −3 2 )3 = ( −1 ⋅ 3 2 )3 = ( −1 )3 ( 3 2 )3 = ( −1 )( 3 6 ) = −729
1
1
d. ( xy )−4 =
= 4 4   Negative exponents denote reciprocals.
( xy ) 4
x y
e. ( x 2 y )3 = ( x 2 )3 y 3 = x 2 ⋅ 3 y 3 = x 6 y 3  Recall that ( x 2 )3 = x 2 ⋅ 3 .
Practice Problem 5. Simplify. Write each answer without negative exponents.
a.

−1

( 12 x )

b. ( 5 x −1 ) 2

d. ( x −2 y )−3 

c. ( xy 2 )3

To see the last rule, we consider



( 32 ) . We have
5

( 32 ) = 32 ⋅ 32 ⋅ 32 ⋅ 32 ⋅ 32
5

3⋅3⋅3⋅3⋅3
2⋅2⋅2⋅2⋅2
35
= 5.
2
=

More generally, we have the following rules.

Power-of-Quotient Rules
If a and b are nonzero real numbers and n is an integer, then

( ab ) = ab
n

EXAMPLE 6

n
n

( ab )

−n

=

n

( ba ) = ba .
n

n

Using the Power-of-Quotient Rules

Simplify. Use the power-of-quotient rules to write each answer without negative exponents.
3 3
2 −2
a.
b.
5
3

( )

( )

24

Chapter P Basic Concepts of Algebra

Solution
3 3
33
27
a.
= 3 =
  Equation (2)
5
5
125
2 −2
3 2
32
9
b.
=
= 2 =   Equation (3) followed by equation ( 2 )
3
2
2
4

( )
( )

( )

Practice Problem 6. Simplify. Write each answer without negative exponents.
1 2
10 −2
a.
b.




3
7

( )

( )

WARNING

Incorrect
( 3x )

2

Correct

= 3x 2

( 3x )

5
(x2 ) = x7

Objective 3

= 3 2 x 2 = 9x 2

5
( x 2 ) = x 2⋅5

= x 15

x3x 5

2

x 3x 5

= x

3+ 5

= x 10
= x8

Simplifying Exponential Expressions
Rules for Simplifying Exponential Expressions
An exponential expression is considered simplified when
(i) each base appears only once,
(ii) each exponent is a positive number, and
(iii) no power is raised to a power.

EXAMPLE 7

Simplifying Exponential Expressions

Simplify the following.
 x 5 −3
b.  −3 
 2y 

a. ( −4 x 2 y 3 )( 7 x 3 y )

SIDE NOTE
There are many correct
ways to simplify exponential
expressions. The order in which
you apply the rules for
exponents is a matter of
personal preference.

Solution
a. ( −4 x 2 y 3 )( 7 x 3 y ) = ( −4 )( 7 ) x 2 x 3 y 3 y
= −28 x 2 + 3 y 3 +1
= −28 x 5 y 4
−3

5
b.  x 
 2 y −3 

=
=
=

−3

(x5 )

−3
( 2 y −3 )

x 5( −3 )
2 −3 ( y −3 )−3
x −15
2 −3 y ( −3 )( −3 )

x −15
2 −3 y 9
x −15 x 15 2 3
= 15 3 −3 9
x 2 2 y
23
= 15 9
x y
8
= 15 9
x y
=

Group factors with the same base.
Apply the product rule to add exponents;
remember that y = y 1 .

The exponent −3 is applied to both the numerator
and the denominator.
Multiply exponents in the numerator; apply the
exponent −3 to each factor in the denominator.
Power rule for exponents; 5( −3 ) = −15.
( − 3 )( − 3 ) = 9

Multiply numerator and denominator by x 15 2 3.
x −15 x 15 = x 0 = 1; 2 3 2 −3 = 2 0 = 1
23 = 8

Section P.2 Integer Exponents and Scientific Notation

25

Practice Problem 7. Simplify each expression.
a. ( 2 x 4 )−2

Objective 4

b.

x 2 ( −y ) 3
3 
( xy 2 )





Scientific Notation
Scientific measurements and calculations often involve very large or very small positive
numbers. For example, 1 gram of oxygen contains approximately
37,600,000,000,000,000,000,000 atoms
and the mass of one oxygen atom is approximately
0.0000000000000000000000266 gram.
Such numbers contain so many zeros that they are awkward to work with in calculations.
Fortunately, scientific notation provides a better way to write and work with such large and
small numbers.
Scientific notation consists of the product of a number less than 10, and greater than or
equal to 1, and an integer power of 10. That is, scientific notation of a number has the form
c × 10 n ,
where c is a real number in decimal notation with 1 ≤ c < 10 and n is an integer.
Converting a Decimal Number to Scientific Notation
1. Count the number, n, of places the decimal point in the given number must be
moved to obtain a number c with 1 ≤ c < 10.
2. If the decimal point is moved n places to the left, the scientific notation is c × 10 n.
If the decimal point is moved n places to the right, the scientific notation is
c × 10 −n.
3. If the decimal point does not need to be moved, the scientific notation is c × 10 0.

TECHNOLOGY CONNECTION
To write numbers in scientific
notation on a graphing
calculator, you first must
change the mode to scientific.
Then on most graphing
calculators, you will see the
number displayed as a decimal
number, followed by the letter
E, followed by the exponent for
10. So 421,000 is shown as
4.21E5 and 0.0018 is shown
as 1.8E-3. Some calculators
omit the E.

EXAMPLE 8

Converting a Decimal Number to Scientific Notation

Write each decimal number in scientific notation.
a. 421,000

b. 10

c. 3.621

d. 0.000561

Solution
a. Because 421,000 = 421000.0, count five spaces to move the decimal point between
the 4 and the 2 and produce the number 4.21.
421,000 = 4 2 1 0 0 0.
5 places

Because the decimal point is moved five places to the left, the exponent is positive and
we write
421, 000 = 4.21 × 10 5.
b. The decimal point for 10 is to the right of the units digit. Count one place to move the
decimal point between the 1 and the 0 and produce the number 1.0.
10 = 1 0 . 0
1 places

Because the decimal point is moved one place to the left, the exponent is positive and
we write
10 = 1.0 × 10 1.

26

Chapter P Basic Concepts of Algebra

c. The number 3.621 is already between 1 and 10, so the decimal does not need to be
moved. We write
3.621 = 3.621 × 10 0.
d. The decimal point in 0.000561 must be moved between the 5 and the 6 to produce the
number 5.61. We count four places as follows:
0 . 0 0 0 5 6 1.

SIDE NOTE
Note that in scientific notation,
“small” numbers (positive
numbers less than 1) have
negative exponents and “large”
numbers (numbers greater
than 10) have positive
exponents.

4 places

Because the decimal point is moved four places to the right, the exponent is negative
and we write
0.000561 = 5.61 × 10 −4.
Practice Problem 8. Write 732,000 in scientific notation.

EXAMPLE 9

Distributing Coffee and Candy in America

At the beginning of this section, we mentioned that in 2020, Americans drank about
146 billion cups of coffee and spent more than $21 billion on candy and snacks. To see
how these products would be evenly distributed among the population, we first convert
those numbers to scientific notation.
146 billion is 146,000,000,000 = 1.46 × 10 11.
21 billion is 21,000,000,000 = 2.1 × 10 10.
The U.S. population in 2020 was about 328 million, and 328 million is
328,000,000 = 3.28 × 10 8.
To distribute the coffee evenly among the population, we divide:
1.46 × 10 11
1.46 10 11
146
=
×
=
× 10 11−8 ≈ 0.445 × 10 3 = 445 cups per person.
8
8
3.28 × 10
3.28 10
328
To distribute the cost of the candy evenly among the population, we divide:
2.1 × 10 10
2.10 10 10
210
=
×
=
× 10 10 −8 ≈ 0.64 × 10 2 = 64,
8
8
3.28 × 10
3.28 10
328
or about $64 per person.
Practice Problem 9. If the amount spent on candy and snacks consumption remains
unchanged when the U.S. population reaches 350 million, what is the cost per person when
cost is distributed evenly throughout the population?

Main Facts about Exponents
. . a for a ≠ 0, a 0 = 1, and a −n =
a n = a
⋅ a. 
n factors

1
an

am
= a m− n
an

Product Rule: a m ⋅ a n = a m + n

Quotient Rule:

Power-of-a-Power Rule: ( a m ) n = a mn

Power-of-a-Product Rule: ( ab ) m = a m b m

Power-of-Quotient Rules:

( ab ) = ab ; ( ab )
n

n

n

−n

=

n

( ba ) = ba , b = 0
n

n

Section P.2 Integer Exponents and Scientific Notation

P.2

27

Exercises

Concepts and Vocabulary
1. In the expression 7 −2 , the number −2 is called the ___________.
2. In the expression −3 7 , the base is ___________.
1
simplifies to the positive integer ___________.
4 −2
4. The power-of-a-product rule allows us to rewrite ( 5a )3 as
___________.

3. The number

5. True or False. ( −11 )10 = −1110.
6. True or False. The exponential expression ( x 2 )3 is considered simplified.
7. True or False. ( ab ) n = a n b n
8. True or False. ( a + b ) n = a n + b n

In Exercises 9–46, evaluate each expression.

11.

( 12 )

10. 2 −3
−4

−2

( 12 )

12. −

14. ( −8 ) 0

13. 7 0

16. ( 2 )

15. −( −7 ) 0
17. ( 2 3 )

2

0

19. ( 3 2 )−2

20. ( 7 2 )−1

21. ( 5 −2 )3
23. ( 4 −3 ) ⋅ ( 4 5 )

22. ( 5 −1 )3
24. ( 7 −2 ) ⋅ ( 7 3 )

0

27. 3 −2 +

( 13 )

29. −2 −3
31. ( −3 )
33.
35.
37.
39.

−2

2 11
2 10

2

0

26. ( 5 ) − 9 0
28. 5 −2 +

4

512
2 5 ⋅ 3 −2
2 4 ⋅ 3 −3
− 5 −2
2 −1

32. ( −2 )

36.
38.
40.

−3

36
38
(95 )

4 −2 ⋅ 5 3
4 −3 ⋅ 5
− 7 −2
3 −1

( )

1 −1
42.
5

2 −2
43.
3

3 −2
44.
2

45.

( 117 )

−2

51. x −1 y −2

52. x −3 y −2

53. ( x −3 ) 4

54. ( x −5 ) 2

55. ( x −11 )−3

56. ( x −4 )−12

5

58. −8( xy )6

59. 4 ( xy −1 ) 2

60. 6( x −1 y ) 3

61. 3( x −1 y )−5

62. −5( xy −1 )−6

57. −3( xy )

( )

( )

46.

−2

( 135 )

( x3 )

2

(x2 )

5

64.
3

65.

( 2xxy )

67.

( x )

69.

( −53x )

2

−3 x 2 y 5
−2

66.

x2
( x3 )

4

( 5xxy )

4

3

 −2 xy 2 3
68. 
 y 
70.

−4

( −35y )

 3x 2 y 5
72.  3 
 y 

73.

x 3 y −3
x −2 y

74.

x 2 y −2
x −1 y 2

75.

27 x −3 y 5
9 x −4 y 7

76.

15 x 5 y −2
3 x 7 y −3

77.

1 ( 2 ) 3 −4
x
x
x3

78. ( 8a 3 b )−4

2

( 2ba )

12

79. ( −xy 2 )3 ( −2 x 2 y 2 )−4

 ( −x 2 y ) 3 y − 4 
80. 

( xy ) 5



81. ( 4 x 3 y 2 z ) 2 ( x 3 y 2 z )−7

82.

2

98

2 −1
41.
3

( )

( 15 )

30. −3 −2

34.

( 53 )

50. x 2 y −2

 4 x −2 3
71. 
 xy 5 

18. ( 3 2 )3

25. ( 3 ) + 10 0

49. x −1 y

63.

Building Skills
9. 3 −2

In Exercises 47–86, simplify each expression. Write your
answers without negative exponents. Whenever an exponent is
negative or zero, assume that the base is not zero.
47. x 4 y 0
48. x −1 y 0

83.

5a −2 bc 2
a 4 b −3 c 2
 xy −3 z −2 −3

85.  2 −4 3 
x y z 

84.

−2

( 2 xyz ) 2
2

( x 3 y ) ( xz )−1
( − 3 ) 2 a 5 ( bc )
( −2 )

3

2

a 2 b 3c 4

 xy −2 z −1 −1

86.  −5 −8 
 x yz 

In Exercises 87–94, write each number in scientific notation.
87. 125
88. 247
89. 850,000

90. 205,000

91. 0.007

92. 0.0019

93. 0.00000275

94. 0.0000038

28

Chapter P Basic Concepts of Algebra

Applying the Concepts
Uniform Scaling. In Exercises 95 and 96, use the fact that
when you uniformly stretch or shrink a three-dimensional
object in every direction by a factor of a, the volume of the
resulting figure is scaled by a factor of a 3 . For example, when
you uniformly scale (stretch or shrink) a three-dimensional
object by a factor of 2, the volume of the resulting figure is
scaled by a factor of 2 3 , or 8.
95. A display in the shape of a baseball bat has a volume of
135 cubic feet. Find the volume of the display that results
by uniformly scaling the figure by a factor of 2.
96. A display in the shape of a football has a volume of 675
cubic inches. Find the volume of the display that results by
1
uniformly scaling the figure by a factor of .
3
97. The area A of a square with side of length x is given by
A = x 2 . Use this relationship to
a. verify that doubling the length of the side of a square
floor increases the area of the floor by a factor of 2 2.
b. verify that tripling the length of the side of a square floor
increases the area of the floor by a factor of 3 2.
98. The area A of a circle with diameter d is given by
d 2
A = π
. Use this relationship to
2
a. verify that doubling the length of the diameter of a
circular skating rink increases the area of the rink by a
factor of 2 2.
b. verify that tripling the length of the diameter of a circular
skating rink increases the area of the rink by a factor
of 3 2.

( )

99. Weight-bearing supports. The cross section of one
type of weight-bearing rod (the surface you would get if
you sliced the rod perpendicular to its axis) used in the
Olympics is a square, as shown in the accompanying figure.
The rod can handle a stress of 25,000 pounds per square
inch (psi). The relationship between the stress S the rod
can handle, the load F the rod can carry, and the width w
of the cross section is given by the equation Sw 2 = F.
Assuming that w = 0.25 inch, find the load the rod can
support.

d

101. Pet expenditures. Assume that pet industry expenditures
in the United States is approximately 99 billion dollars and the
U.S. population is 330 million. If this expense is distributed
evenly across the population, what is the cost per person?
102. Sporting event costs. Assume that Americans spend
$56 billion dollars on attending sporting events and the U.S.
population is 330 million. If this expense is distributed evenly
across the population, what is the cost per person?
103. Unit conversion. A year has 365.25 days. Write the number
of seconds in one year in scientific notation.
104. Unit conversion. Repeat Exercise 103 for a leap year
(366 days).
105. Celestial bodies. Complete the following table.
Celestial
Body

Equatorial
Diameter ( km )

Earth

Scientific Notation

12,700

Moon

3.48 × 10 3 ( km )

Sun

1,390,000

Jupiter

1.34 × 10 5 ( km )

Mercury

4800

Scientific notation. In Exercises 106–112, express the number
in each statement in scientific notation.
106. One gram of oxygen contains about
37,600,000,000,000,000,000,000 atoms.
107. One gram of hydrogen contains about
602,000,000,000,000,000,000 atoms.
108. One oxygen atom weighs about
0.0000000000000000000266 kilogram.
109. One hydrogen atom weighs about
0.00000000000000000000167 kilogram.
110. The distance from Earth to the moon is about

w

w

l

380,000,000 meters.
w

111. The mass of Earth is about
5,980,000,000,000,000,000,000,000 kilograms.
112. The mass of the sun is about

100. Weight-bearing supports. The cross section of one
type of weight-bearing rod (the surface you would get if
you sliced the rod perpendicular to its axis) used in the
Olympics is a circle, as shown in the figure. The rod can
handle a stress of 10,000 pounds per square inch (psi). The
relationship between the stress S the rod can handle, the
load F the rod can carry, and the diameter d of the cross
section is given by the equation S π ( d /2 ) 2 = F . Assuming
that d = 1.5 inches, find the load the rod can support. Use
π ≈ 3.14 in your calculation.

2,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000 kilograms.

Beyond the Basics
113. If 2 x = 32, find
a. 2 x + 2.
b. 2 x −1.
115. If 5 x = 11, find
a. 5 x +1.

b. 5 x − 2.

114. If 3 x = 81, find
a. 3 x +1.
b. 3 x − 2.
116. If a x = b, find
a. a x + 2 .
b. a x −1 .

Section P.3 Polynomials
3 2− n ⋅ 9 2 n− 2
.
3 3n
2 m +1 ⋅ 3 2 m − n ⋅ 5 m + n + 2 ⋅ 6 n
118. Simplify:
.
6 m ⋅ 10 n +1 ⋅ 15 m
		[Hint: 6 = 2 ⋅ 3, 10 = 2 ⋅ 5, 15 = 3 ⋅ 5.]
117. Simplify:

GETTING READY

z

( ).

119. Simplify:

2 x( y − z )
2y
÷ x
2 y( x − z )
2

120. Simplify:

( ) ( ) ( ) .
ax
ay

1
xy

⋅

ay
az

1
yz

⋅

az
ax

1
xz

for the Next Section

REVIEW CONCEPTS
Definition of subtraction (Section P.1, page 13)
Properties of opposites (Section P.1, page 13)

GR2. Simplify:
a. 2 x 2 + 5 x 2 .
c. 3 x 3 − 5 x 3 + 11x 3 .

b. 3 x 2 − 4 x 2 .

Rules for exponents (Section P.2, page 26)

Associative, commutative, and distributive properties
(Section P.1, page 12)

REVIEW SKILLS

GR3. x ( 2 x + 5 )

Integer exponents (Section P.1, page 5)

GR5. −5 x ( x 2 + 1 )

GR1. Simplify:
a. x 2 ⋅ x 5
b. ( 2 x )( −5 x 2 )
c. ( 2 y 2 )( 3 y 3 )( 4 y 5 )

GR6. True or False. ( 6 x + 4 )( x + 9 ) = ( x + 9 )( 6 x + 4 )

P.3

GR4. 2 x ( 7 − 3 x )

GR7. True or False. 5 x 2 + 3 x 3 = 8 x 5
GR8. Use the distributive property to simplify:
2 x 2 ( 5 x 3 − 3 x + 4 ).

Polynomials
Objectives

Videos for
this Section

1

Learn polynomial vocabulary.

2

Add and subtract polynomials.

3

Multiply polynomials.

4

Use special-product formulas.

Galileo and Free-Falling Objects
At one time, it was widely believed that heavy
objects should fall faster than lighter objects,
or, more exactly, that the speed of falling
objects ought to be proportional to their
weights. So if one object is four times as heavy
as another, the heavier object should fall four
times as fast as the lighter one. Legend has it
that Galileo Galilei (1564–1642) disproved
this theory by dropping two balls of equal size,
one made of lead and the other of balsa
wood, from the top of Italy’s Leaning Tower of
Pisa. Both balls are said to have reached the
ground at the same instant after they were
released simultaneously from the top of the
tower.

Leaning Tower of Pisa

29

30

Chapter P Basic Concepts of Algebra
In fact, such experiments “work” properly only in a vacuum, where objects of different mass do
fall at the same rate. In the absence of a vacuum, air resistance may greatly affect the rate at which
different objects fall. Whether Galileo’s experiment was actually performed is unknown, but astronaut David R. Scott successfully performed a version of Galileo’s experiment (using a feather and a
hammer) on the surface of the moon on August 2, 1971. It turns out that on Earth (ignoring air
resistance), regardless of the weight of the object we hold at rest and then drop, the expression 16t 2
gives the distance in feet the object falls in t seconds. If we throw the object down with an initial
velocity of v 0 feet per second, the distance the object travels in t seconds is given by the expression
16t 2 + v 0 t.
In Example 1, we evaluate such expressions.

Objective 1

Polynomial Vocabulary
The height (in feet) of a golf ball above a driving range t seconds after being driven from
the tee (at 70 feet per second) is given by the polynomial 70t − t 2 . After two seconds
( t = 2 ) , the ball is 70 ( 2 ) − ( 2 ) 2 = 136 feet above the ground. Polynomials such as
70t − t 2 appear frequently in applications.
We begin by reviewing the basic vocabulary of polynomials. A monomial is the simplest
polynomial; it contains one term. In the variable x it has the form ax k , where a is a constant and
k is either a positive integer or zero. The constant a is called the coefficient of the monomial.
For a ≠ 0, the integer k is called the degree of the monomial. If a = 0, the monomial is 0 and
has no degree. Any variable may be used in place of x to form a monomial in that variable.
The following are examples of monomials.
2x 5

The coefficient is 2, and the degree is 5.

−3 x 2
−7
8x

The coefficient is −3, and the degree is 2.
−7 = −7 ( 1 ) = −7 x 0 . The coefficient is −7, and the degree is 0.
The coefficient is 8, and the degree is 1( x = x 1 ).
The coefficient is 1 ( x 12 = 1 ⋅ x 12 ), and the degree is 12.
The coefficient is −1( −x 4 = ( −1 ) ⋅ x 4 ), and the degree is 4.

x 12
−x 4

The expression 5 x −3 is not a monomial because the exponent on x is negative.
Two monomials in the same variable with the same degree can be combined into
one monomial using the distributive property. For example, −3 x 5 and 9 x 5 can be
added: −3 x 5 + 9 x 5 = ( −3 + 9 ) x 5 = 6 x 5 . Or −3 x 5 and 9 x 5 can be subtracted:
−3 x 5 − 9 x 5 = ( −3 − 9 ) x 5 = −12 x 5 . Monomials in the same variable with the same
degree are called like terms.
Polynomials in One Variable
A polynomial in x is any sum of monomials in x. By combining like terms, we can
write any polynomial in the form
a n x n + a n −1 x n −1 +  + a 2 x 2 + a 1 x + a 0 ,
where n is either a positive integer or zero and a n , a n −1 , . . . a1 , a 0 are constants,
called the coefficients of the polynomial. If a n ≠ 0, then n, the largest exponent on x,
is called the degree and a n is called the leading coefficient of the polynomial. The
monomials a n x n , a n −1 x n −1 , . . . , a 2 x 2 , a1 x, and a 0 are the terms of the polynomial.
The monomial a n x n is the leading term of the polynomial, and a 0 is the constant term.
The symbols a 0 , a1 , a 2 , . . . a n in the general notation for a polynomial
a n x n + a n −1 x n −1 +  + a 2 x 2 + a 1 x + a 0
are just constants; the numbers to the lower right of a are called subscripts. The notation a 2
is read “a sub 2”, a1 is read “a sub 1”, and a 0 is read “a sub 0”. This type of notation is used
when a large or indefinite number of constants are required. The terms of the polynomial
5 x 2 + 3 x + 1 are 5 x 2 , 3 x, and 1; the coefficients are 5, 3, and 1; and its degree is 2.

Section P.3 Polynomials

31

Note that the terms in the general form for a polynomial are connected by the addition
symbol +. How do we handle 5 x 2 − 3 x + 1? Because subtraction is defined in terms of
addition, we rewrite
5 x 2 − 3 x + 1 = 5 x 2 + ( −3 ) x + 1
and see that the terms of 5 x 2 − 3 x + 1 are 5 x 2 , −3 x, and 1 and that the coefficients are 5, −3,
and 1. (The degree is 2.) Once we recognize this fact, we no longer rewrite the polynomial with
the + sign separating terms; we just remember that the “sign” is part of both the term and the
coefficient. Polynomials and their properties will be discussed in more detail in Chapter 3.
Polynomials can be classified according to the number of terms they have. Polynomials
with one term are called monomials, polynomials with two unlike terms are called binomials, and polynomials with three unlike terms are called trinomials. Polynomials with
more than three unlike terms do not have special names.
By agreement, the only polynomial that has no degree is the zero polynomial, which
results when all of the coefficients are 0. It is easiest to find the degree of a polynomial
when it is written in descending order—that is, when the exponents decrease from left to
right. In this case, the degree is the exponent of the leftmost term. A polynomial written in
descending order is said to be in standard form.
EXAMPLE 1

Examining Free-Falling Objects

In our introductory discussion about Galileo and free-falling objects, we mentioned two
well-known polynomials.
1. 16t 2 gives the distance in feet a free-falling object falls in t seconds.
2. With v 0 = 10, the expression 16t 2 + 10t gives the distance an object falls in t seconds when it is thrown down with an initial velocity of 10 feet per second. Use these
polynomials to
a. Find how far a wallet dropped from the 86th-floor observatory of the Empire
State Building will fall in 5 seconds.
b. Find how far a quarter thrown down with an initial velocity of 10 feet per second
from a hot air balloon will travel after 5 seconds.

Solution
a. The value of 16t 2 for t = 5 is 16 ( 5 ) 2 = 400. The wallet falls 400 feet.
b. The value of 16t 2 + 10t for t = 5 is 16 ( 5 ) 2 + 10 ( 5 ) = 450. The quarter travels
450 feet on its downward path after five seconds.
Practice Problem 1. If 16t 2 + 15t gives the distance an object falls in t seconds when
it is thrown down at an initial velocity of 15 feet per second, find how far a quarter thrown
down with an initial velocity of 15 feet per second from a hot air balloon has traveled after
7 seconds.

Objective 2

Adding and Subtracting Polynomials
Like monomials, polynomials are added and subtracted by combining like terms. By convention, we write polynomials in standard form.
EXAMPLE 2

Adding Polynomials

Find the sum of the polynomials
−4 x 3 + 5 x 2 + 7 x − 2

and

6 x 3 − 2 x 2 − 8 x − 5.

Horizontal Method: Group like terms and then combine them.
( −4 x 3 + 5 x 2 + 7 x − 2 ) + ( 6 x 3 − 2 x 2 − 8 x − 5 )

= ( −4 x 3 + 6 x 3 ) + ( 5 x 2 − 2 x 2 ) + ( 7 x − 8 x ) + ( −2 − 5 )
=

2 x 3 + 3x 2 − x − 7

Group like terms.
Combine like terms.

32

Chapter P Basic Concepts of Algebra

A second method for adding polynomials is to arrange them in columns so that like terms
appear in the same column.
Column Method:
−4 x 3 + 5 x 2 + 7 x − 2
( + ) 6 x 3 − 2 x 2 − 8x − 5
2 x 3 + 3x 2 −

x − 7 (answer)

Practice Problem 2. Find the sum of
7x 3 + 2x 2 − 5
EXAMPLE 3

−2 x 3 + 3 x 2 + 2 x + 1.

and

Subtracting Polynomials

Find the difference of the polynomials
( 9 x 4 − 6 x 3 + 4 x 2 − 1 ) − ( 2 x 4 − 11x 3 + 5 x + 3 ) .

Horizontal Method: First, using the definition of subtraction, change the sign of each
term in the second polynomial. Then add the resulting polynomials by grouping like terms
and combining them.
( 9 x 4 − 6 x 3 + 4 x 2 − 1 ) − ( 2 x 4 − 11x 3 + 5 x + 3 )

= ( 9 x 4 − 6 x 3 + 4 x 2 − 1 ) + ( −2 x 4 + 11x 3 − 5 x − 3 )
= ( 9 x 4 − 2 x 4 ) + ( −6 x 3 + 11x 3 ) + 4 x 2 − 5 x + ( −1 − 3 )

Group like terms.

= 7 x 4 + 5x 3 + 4 x 2 − 5x − 4

Combine like terms.

The second method for finding the difference of polynomials requires arranging them in
columns so that like terms appear in the same column.
Column Method: To find the difference, we again change the sign of each term in the
second polynomial and then add.
9x 4 − 6x 3 + 4 x 2
( + ) −2 x 4 + 11x 3

−1
−5 x − 3

Change signs and then add.

7 x 4 + 5 x 3 + 4 x 2 − 5 x − 4 ( answer )
Practice Problem 3. Find the difference of
3x 4 − 5x 3 + 2 x 2 + 7

Objective 3

and

−2 x 4 + 3 x 2 + x − 5. 

Multiplying Polynomials
Previously, we multiplied two monomials, such as −3 x 2 and 5 x 3 , by using the product rule
for exponents: a m ⋅ a n = a m + n . We multiply a monomial and a polynomial by combining the product rule and the distributive property.
EXAMPLE 4

Multiplying a Monomial and a Trinomial

Multiply 4 x 3 and 3 x 2 − 5 x + 7.
4 x 3 ( 3x 2 − 5x + 7 )
= ( 4 x 3 )( 3 x 2 ) + ( 4 x 3 )( −5 x ) + ( 4 x 3 )( 7 )

Distributive property

= ( 4 ⋅ 3 ) x 3 + 2 + 4 ( −5 ) x 3 +1 + ( 4 ⋅ 7 ) x 3

Multiply monomials.

= 12 x 5 − 20 x 4 + 28 x 3

Simplify.

Practice Problem 4. Multiply −2 x 3 and 4 x 2 + 2 x − 5.

Section P.3 Polynomials

33

We can use the distributive property repeatedly to multiply any two polynomials. As
with addition, there are two methods.

EXAMPLE 5

Multiplying a Binomial and a Trinomial

Multiply 4 x 2 + 3 x and x 2 + 2 x − 3.
Horizontal Method: We treat the second polynomial as a single term and use the
distributive property, ( a + b ) c = ac + bc, to multiply it by each of the two terms in the
first polynomial.
( 4 x 2 + 3 x )( x 2 + 2 x − 3 )

= 4 x 2 ( x 2 + 2 x − 3 ) + 3x ( x 2 + 2 x − 3 )

Distributive property

= 4 x 2 ( x 2 ) + 4 x 2 ( 2 x ) + 4 x 2 ( −3 ) + 3 x ( x 2 ) + 3 x ( 2 x ) + 3 x ( −3 ) Distributive property
= 4 x 4 + 8 x 3 − 12 x 2 + 3 x 3 + 6 x 2 − 9 x
= 4 x 4 + ( 8 x 3 + 3 x 3 ) + ( −12 x 2 + 6 x 2 ) − 9 x

Product rule
Group like terms.

= 4 x 4 + 11x 3 − 6 x 2 − 9 x

Combine like terms.

The column method resembles the multiplication of two positive integers written in column
form.
Column Method:
x 2 + 2x − 3
4 x 2 + 3x

( *)

3x 3 + 6 x 2 − 9 x
Place like terms in the
same column.

Multiply by 3 x
( 3 x )( x 2 + 2 x − 3 ) .

4 x 4 + 8 x 3 − 12 x 2

Multiply by 4 x 2
( 4 x 2 )( x 2 + 2 x − 3 ) .

4 x 4 + 11x 3 − 6 x 2 − 9 x ( answer )

Combine like terms.

Practice Problem 5. Multiply 5 x 2 + 2 x and −2 x 2 + x − 7.
The basic multiplication rule for polynomials can be stated as follows.

Multiplying Polynomials
To multiply two polynomials, multiply each term of one polynomial by every term of
the other polynomial and combine like terms.

Objective 4

Special Products
Particular polynomial products called special products occur frequently enough to deserve
special attention. We introduce a very useful method, called FOIL, for multiplying two
binomials. Notice that
( x + 2 )( x − 7 ) = x ( x − 7 ) + 2 ( x − 7 )

Distributive property

= x 2 − 7 x + 2 x − 14

Distributive property

= x 2 − 5 x − 14.

Combine like terms.

34

Chapter P Basic Concepts of Algebra

Now consider the relationship between the terms of the factors in ( x + 2 )( x − 7 ) and the
second line, x 2 − 7 x + 2 x − 14, in the computation of the product.
Product of First terms
( x + 2 )( x − 7 ) =

x 2 − 7 x + 2 x − 14    F irst terms: x ⋅ x = x 2

Product of Outer terms
( x + 2 )( x − 7 ) =

O uter terms: x ⋅ ( −7 ) = −7 x ￼

x 2 − 7 x + 2 x − 14

Product of Inner terms
( x + 2 )( x − 7 ) =

I nner terms: 2 ⋅ x = 2 x  ￼

x 2 − 7 x + 2 x − 14

Product of Last terms
( x + 2 )( x − 7 ) =

L ast terms: 2 ⋅ ( −7 ) = −14

x 2 − 7 x + 2 x − 14

Foil Method for ( A + B )( C + D )
First

Last

( A + B )( C + D ) =

Inner
Outer

EXAMPLE 6

F

O

I

L

A ⋅ C + A ⋅ D+ B ⋅ C + B ⋅ D

Multiply
first terms.

Multiply
outer terms.

Multiply
inner terms.

Multiply
last terms.

Using the FOIL Method

Use the FOIL method to find the following products.
F

O

I

L

a. ( 2 x + 3 )( x − 1 ) = ( 2 x )( x ) + ( 2 x )( −1 ) + ( 3 )( x ) + ( 3 )( −1)
= 2 x 2 − 2 x + 3x − 3
= 2x 2 + x − 3

Combine like terms.

F

O

I

L

b. ( 3 x − 5 )( 4 x − 6 ) = ( 3 x )( 4 x ) + ( 3 x )( −6 ) + ( −5 )( 4 x ) + ( −5 )( −6 )
= 12 x 2 − 18 x − 20 x + 30
= 12 x 2 − 38 x + 30
c.

( x + a )( x + b ) =

F

O

Combine like terms.

I

L

x⋅x+ x⋅b+a⋅x+a⋅b

= x 2 + bx + ax + a ⋅ b
=

xb = bx (commutative property)

x 2 + ( b + a ) x + ab

Combine like terms.

Practice Problem 6. Use FOIL to find each product.
a. ( 4 x − 1 )( x + 7 )

b. ( 3 x − 2 )( 2 x − 5 )



Squaring a Binomial Sum or Difference
We can find a general formula for the square of any binomial sum ( A + B ) 2 by using FOIL.
( A + B )2

F

O

I

L

= ( A + B )( A + B ) = A ⋅ A + A ⋅ B + B ⋅ A + B ⋅ B
AB = BA
= A 2 + AB + AB + B 2
AB + AB = 2 AB
= A 2 + 2 AB + B 2

Section P.3 Polynomials

35

Squaring a Binomial Sum
( A + B )2

= A 2 + 2 AB + B 2

A formula such as ( A + B ) 2 = A 2 + 2 AB + B 2 can be used two ways.
EXAMPLE 7

Finding the Square of a Binomial Sum
2

Find ( 2 x + 3 ) .

Solution
Pattern Method: In ( 2 x + 3 ) 2 , the first term is 2 x and the second term is 3. Rewrite the
formula as
Square of
Square of = Square of + 2 Product of first
+
sum
second term
first term
and second terms
( 2 x + 3 )2

( 2 x )2

=

+

2 ⋅ ( 2x ) ⋅ 3

= 22 x 2 + 2 ⋅ 2 ⋅ 3 ⋅ x + 32
=

4 x 2 + 12 x + 9.

+

32

Group numerical factors.
Simplify.

Substitution Method: In the formula ( A + B ) 2 = A 2 + 2 AB + B 2 , substitute
2 x = A and 3 = B. Then
( 2 x + 3 )2 = ( 2 x )2 + 2 ⋅ ( 2 x ) ⋅ 3 + 3 2

= 22 x 2 + 2 ⋅ 2 ⋅ 3 ⋅ x + 32

Group numerical factors.

= 4 x 2 + 12 x + 9.

Simplify.

Practice Problem 7. Find ( 3 x + 2 ) 2 .
The definition of subtraction allows us to write any difference A − B as the sum
A + ( −B ). Because A − B = A + ( −B ), we can use the formula for the square of a
binomial sum to find a formula for the square of a binomial difference ( A − B ) 2.
( A − B )2

= [ A + ( −B ) ]2

First term = A; second term = −B

= A 2 + 2 A ( −B ) + ( −B ) 2
= A 2 − 2 AB + B 2
WARNING

2 A ( −B ) = −2 AB; ( −B ) 2 = B 2
Correct

Incorrect
= x + y2

( x + y ) 2 = x 2 + 2 xy + y 2

( x − y )2 = x 2 + y 2

( x − y ) 2 = x 2 − 2 xy + y 2

(x + y)

2

( x + 4 )( x + 5 )

= x + 4x + 5

( x + 4 )( x + 5 )

= x 2 + 9 x + 20

The Product of the Sum and Difference of Terms
Products Giving a Difference of Squares
( A + B )( A − B ) =

A2 − B2

We leave it for you to use FOIL to verify the formula for finding the product of the sum and
difference of terms.

36

Chapter P Basic Concepts of Algebra

EXAMPLE 8

Finding the Product of the Sum and Difference of Terms

Find the product ( 3 x + 4 )( 3 x − 4 ).

Solution
We use the substitution method; substitute 3 x = A and 4 = B in the formula
( A + B )( A − B ) = A 2 − B 2 . Then
( 3 x + 4 )( 3 x − 4 ) = ( 3 x) 2 − 4 2

= 9 x 2 − 16.

( 3x )2

= 3 2 x 2 = 9x 2

Practice Problem 8. Find the product ( 1 − 2 x )( 1 + 2 x ).
The special-products formulas, such as the formulas for squaring a binomial sum or
difference, are used often and should be memorized. However, you should be able to derive
them from FOIL, if you forget them. We list several of these formulas next.

Special-Product Formulas
A and B represent any algebraic expressions.
Formula

Example

Product giving a difference of squares
( A + B )( A − B ) =

A2 − B2

( 5 x + 2 )( 5 x − 2 ) = ( 5 x ) 2 − 2 2

= 25 x 2 − 4
Squaring a binomial sum or difference
( A + B )2

= A 2 + 2 AB + B 2

( 3x + 2 )2

= ( 3 x ) 2 + 2 ( 3 x )( 2 ) + 2 2
= 9 x 2 + 12 x + 4

( A − B )2

= A 2 − 2 AB + B 2

( 2 x − 5 )2

= ( 2 x ) 2 − 2 ( 2 x )( 5 ) + 5 2
= 4 x 2 − 20 x + 25

Cubing a binomial sum or difference
( A + B )3

= A 3 + 3 A 2 B + 3 AB 2 + B 3

( x + 5 )3

= A 3 − 3 A 2 B + 3 AB 2 − B 3

3

= x 3 + 3x 2 ( 5 ) + 3x ( 5 )2 + 5 3
= x 3 + 15 x 2 + 75 x + 125

( A − B)

3

( x − 4)

= x 3 − 3x 2 ( 4 ) + 3x ( 4 )2 − 4 3
= x 3 − 12 x 2 + 48 x − 64

Products giving a sum or difference of cubes
( A + B )( A 2 − AB + B 2 ) =

A3 + B3
( A − B )( A 2 + AB + B 2 ) = A 3 − B 3

( x + 2 )( x 2 − 2 x + 4 ) =

x 3 + 23 = x 3 + 8
( x − 3 )( x 2 + 3 x + 9 ) = x 3 − 3 3 = x 3 − 27

To this point, we have investigated polynomials only in a single variable. We next
extend our previous vocabulary to discuss polynomials in more than one variable. Any
product of a constant and two or more variables, each raised to whole-number powers, is a
monomial in those variables. The constant is called the coefficient of the monomial, and
the degree of the monomial is the sum of all the exponents appearing on its variables. For
example, the monomial 5 x 3 y 4 is of degree 3 + 4 = 7 with coefficient 5.
EXAMPLE 9
Multiply.

Multiplying Polynomials in Two Variables

a. ( 7a + 5b )( 7a − 5b )   b. ( 2 x + 3 y )3

Section P.3 Polynomials

Solution
a. ( 7a + 5b )( 7a − 5b ) = ( 7a ) 2 − ( 5b ) 2
= 49a 2 − 25b 2

( A + B )( A − B ) =

37

A2 − B2

Simplify.

3
b. ( 2 x + 3 y ) = ( 2 x ) + 3( 2 x ) ( 3 y ) + 3( 2 x )( 3 y ) 2 + ( 3 y )3 ( A + B ) =
A 3 + 3 A 2 B + 3 AB 2 + B 3
3

3

2

= 2 3 x 3 + 3( 2 2 x 2 )( 3 y ) + 3( 2 x )( 3 2 y 2 ) + 3 3 y 3 Power-of-a-product rule
= 8 x 3 + 36 x 2 y + 54 xy 2 + 27 y 3

Simplify.

Practice Problem 9. Multiply.
a. ( x + 2 y )( x − 2 y )

P.3

b. ( 2 x − y )3 



Exercises

Concepts and Vocabulary
1. The polynomial −3 x 7 + 2 x 2 − 9 x + 4 has leading
coefficient ______________ and degree ______________.
2. When a polynomial is written so that the exponents in
each term decrease from left to right, it is said to be in
______________ form.
3. When a polynomial in x of degree 3 is added to a polynomial
in x of degree 4, the resulting polynomial has degree
______________.
4. When a polynomial in x of degree 3 is multiplied by a
polynomial in x of degree 4, the resulting polynomial has
degree ______________.
5. True or False. When FOIL is used, the terms 7 and x are
called the inside terms of the product ( 4 x + 7 )( x − 2 ).
6. True or False. There are values of A and B for which
( A + B )2 = A 2 + B 2 .
7. True or False. The expression x 3 − 3 x + 7 is a
polynomial of degree 3.
8. True or False.
polynomial of degree 5.

The expression x 5 −

2 x 3 + 11 is a

Building Skills
In Exercises 9–16, determine whether the given expression is
a polynomial. If it is, write it in standard form.
1
10. x −
9. 1 + x 2 + 2 x
x
11. x −2

+ 3x + 5

13. x 2 − 2 x
15. 5 x 3 −

+4

π − 7 x + 11

12. 3 x 4

+ x7

+ 3x 5 − 2 x + 1

14.

x3 + 5

x +1

16.

2x 2 −

3x + 4

In Exercises 17–20, find the degree and list the terms of the
polynomial.
17. 7 x + 3
18. −3 x 2 + 7
19. x 2 − x 4 + 2 x − 9

20. x + 2 x 3 + 9 x 7 − 21

In Exercises 21–30, perform the indicated operations. Write
the resulting polynomial in standard form.
21. ( x 3 + 2 x 2 − 5 x + 3 ) + ( −x 3 + 2 x − 4 )
22. ( x 3 − 3 x + 1 ) + ( x 3 − x 2 + x − 3 )
23. ( 2 x 3 − x 2 + x − 5 ) − ( x 3 − 4 x + 3 )
24. ( −x 3 + 2 x − 4 ) − ( x 3 + 3 x 2 − 7 x + 2 )
25. ( −2 x 4 + 3 x 2 − 7 x ) − ( 8 x 4 + 6 x 3 − 9 x 2 − 17 )
26. 3( x 2 − 2 x + 2 ) + 2( 5 x 2 − x + 4 )
27. −2( 3 x 2 + x + 1 ) + 6( −3 x 2 − 2 x − 2 )
28. 2( 5 x 2 − x + 3 ) − 4 ( 3 x 2 + 7 x + 1 )
29. ( 3 y 3 − 4 y + 2 ) + ( 2 y + 1 ) − ( y 3 − y 2 + 4 )
30. ( 5 y 2 + 3 y − 1 ) − ( y 2 − 2 y + 3 ) + ( 2 y 2 + y + 5 )
In Exercises 31–78, perform the indicated operations.
31. 6 x ( 2 x + 3 )
32. 7 x ( 3 x − 4 )
33. ( x + 1 )( x 2 + 2 x + 2 )

34. ( x − 5 )( 2 x 2 − 3 x + 1 )

35. ( 3 x − 2 )( x 2 − x + 1 )

36. ( 2 x + 1 )( x 2 − 3 x + 4 )

37. ( x + 1 )( x + 2 )

38. ( x + 2 )( x + 3 )

39. ( 3 x + 2 )( 3 x + 1 )

40. ( x + 3 )( 2 x + 5 )

41. ( −4 x + 5 )( x + 3 )

42. ( −2 x + 1 )( x − 5 )

43. ( 3 x − 2 )( 2 x − 1 )

44. ( x − 1 )( 5 x − 3 )

45. ( 2 x − 3a )( 2 x + 5a )

46. ( 5 x − 2a )( x + 5a )

47. ( x + 2 )

2

49. ( 4 x + 1 )

(

51. x +

− x2
2

50. ( 3 x + 2 ) 2

3 2
4

)

53. ( 3 x − 4 y )
55. ( x 2 + 2 ) 2

48. ( x − 3 ) 2 − x 2

(

52. x +
2

2 2
5

)

54. ( 2 x + 5 y ) 2

2

56. ( 3 − x 2 ) 2
2
3
y
58.  − 
y
3

59. ( x + 2 )3

60. ( 2 x − 1 )3

57.

( 2x + 2x )

38

Chapter P Basic Concepts of Algebra

61. ( x + 3 )3 − x 3
63. ( x + 2 y )

62. ( x − 2 )3 − x 3

3

64. ( 2 x + 3 y )

3

65. ( 5 + 2 x )( 5 − 2 x )

66. ( 3 − 4 x )( 3 + 4 x )

67. ( 2 x + 3 y )( 2 x − 3 y )

68. ( 5 x − 2 y )( 5 x + 2 y )
y
2  y
2
70.  −  + 
2
y  2
y

(

69. x +

1
x

)( x − 1x )

71. ( x 2 + 3 )( x 2 − 3 )

72. ( x 3 − 2 )( x 3 + 2 )

73. ( 2 x − 3 )( x 2 − 3 x + 5 )

74. ( x − 2 )( x 2 − 4 x − 3 )

75. ( 1 + y )( 1 − y + y 2 )

76. ( y + 4 )( y 2 − 4 y + 16 )

77. ( x − 6 )( x 2 + 6 x + 36 )

78. ( x − 1 )( x 2 + x + 1 )

In Exercises 79–88, perform the indicated operations.
79. ( x + 2 y )( 3 x + 5 y )
80. ( 2 x + y )( 7 x + 2 y )
81. ( 2 x − y )( 3 x + 7 y )

82. ( x − 3 y )( 2 x + 5 y )

83. ( x − y ) 2 ( x + y ) 2

84. ( 2 x + y ) 2 ( 2 x − y ) 2

85. ( x + y )( x − 2 y )

2

87. ( x − 2 y )3 ( x + 2 y )

86. ( x − y )( x + 2 y ) 2
88. ( 2 x + y )3 ( 2 x − y )

In Exercises 89–94, use a 2 + b 2 = ( a + b ) 2 − 2 ab =
( a − b ) 2 + 2 ab.
89. If x + y = 4 and xy = 3, find the value of x 2 + y 2 .
90. If x − y = 3 and xy = 2, find the value of x 2 + y 2 .
1
= 3, find the value of
x
1
1
a. x 2 + 2 .
b. x 4 + 4 .
x
x
1
92. If x − = 2, find the value of
x
1
1
2
a. x + 2 .
b. x 4 + 4 .
x
x
91. If x +

93. If 3 x + 2 y = 12 and xy = 6, find the value of
9x 2 + 4 y 2 .

In Exercises 99 and 100, use the fact (from Example 1) that
an object thrown down with an initial velocity of v0 feet per
second will travel 16 t 2 + v 0 t feet in t seconds.
99. Free fall. A sandwich is thrown from a helicopter with an
initial downward velocity of 20 feet per second. How far
has the sandwich fallen after five seconds?
100. Free fall. A ring is thrown off the Empire State Building
with an initial downward velocity of 10 feet per second.
How far has the ring fallen after two seconds?
101. Cruise ship revenue. A cruise ship decides to reduce
ticket prices to its theater by x dollars from the current price
of $22.50.
a. Write a polynomial that gives the new price after the
x-dollar deduction.
b. The revenue is the number of tickets sold times the price
of each ticket. If 30 tickets were sold when the price was
$22.50 and 10 additional tickets are sold for each dollar the
price is reduced (all tickets are sold at the same price), write
a polynomial that gives the revenue in terms of x when the
original price is reduced by x dollars.
102. Used-car rentals. A dealer who rents used cars wants to
increase the monthly rent from the current $250 in
n increments of $10.
a. Write a polynomial that gives the new price after
n increments of $10.
b. The revenue is the number of cars rented times the
monthly rent for each car. If 50 cars can be rented at
$250 per month and 2 fewer cars can be rented for each
$10 rent increase, write a polynomial that gives the
monthly revenue in terms of n.

Beyond the Basics
103. Show that ( a + b + c ) 2
= a 2 + b 2 + c 2 + 2ab + 2bc + 2ac.
In Exercises 104–108 use Exercise 103.
104. Find ( x 2 + x + 1 ) 2 .

94. If 3 x − 7 y = 10 and xy = −1, find the value of
9 x 2 + 49 y 2 .

105. Simplify ( 2 x + y − z ) 2 − ( 2 x − y + z ) 2 .

Applying the Concepts

106. If a + b + c = 8 and ab + bc + ac = 12, find the value
of a 2 + b 2 + c 2 .

95. Ticket prices. Theater ticket prices (in dollars)
x years after 2010 are described by the polynomial
0.11x 2 + 0.02 x + 5.57. Find the value of this polynomial
for x = 5 and state the result as the ticket price for a specific
year.

107. If x + y + z = 12 and x 2 + y 2 + z 2 = 44, find the
value of xy + yz + zx.
108. If x 2 + y 2 + z 2 = 64 and xy + yz + zx = 18, find the
value of x + y + z.

96. Box-office grosses. Theater box-office grosses (in
billions of dollars) x years after 2008 are described by the
polynomial 0.035 x 2 + 0.15 x + 5.17. Find the value of this
polynomial for 2012 and state the result as box-office gross
for a specific year.

109. Show that ( a + b + c )( a 2 + b 2 + c 2 − ab − bc − ac )

97. Paper shredding. A business that shreds paper products
finds that it costs 0.1x 2 + x + 50 dollars to serve x customers. What does it cost to serve 40 customers?

In Exercises 111–114 use Exercises 103 and 110 where applicable.
111. Show that ( x − y )3 + ( y − z )3 + ( z − x )3 =
3( x − y )( y − z )( z − x ).

98. Gift baskets. A company will produce x ( for x ≥ 10 ) gift
baskets of wine, meat, cheese, and crackers at a cost of
( x − 10 ) 2 + 5 x dollars per basket. What is the per basket
cost for 15 baskets?

113. If a + b + c = 8 and ab + bc + ac = 19, find the value
of a 3 + b 3 + c 3 − 3abc.

= a 3 + b 3 + c 3 − 3abc.
		
110. Use Exercise 109 to show that if a + b + c = 0, then
a 3 + b 3 + c 3 = 3abc.

112. Show that ( 2 x − 3 y )3 + ( 3 y − 5z )3 + ( 5z − 2 x )3 =
3( 2 x − 3 y )( 3 y − 5z )( 5z − 2 x ).

114. If a + b + c = 9 and ab + bc + ac = 11, find the value
of a 3 + b 3 + c 3 − 3abc.

Section P.4 Factoring Polynomials

GETTING READY

39

for the Next Section

REVIEW CONCEPTS

In Exercises GR5–GR14 find the missing integers in each row.
In Exercises GR9–GR14 choose a and b with a < b .

Exponents (Section P.2, page 19)
Polynomials (Section P.3, pages 29–31)
REVIEW SKILLS
Value of algebraic expressions (Section P.1, pages 11 and 12)
GR1. x ( 2 x + 5 )
GR2. 2 x ( 7 − 3 x )
GR3. −5 x ( x 2 + 1 )
GR4. True or False. ( 6 x + 4 )( x + 9 ) = ( x + 9 )( 6 x + 4 )

P.4

GR5.
GR6.
GR7.
GR8.
GR9.

a
3

b
4

−3

5
2
−5

a+ b

ab

6
−2
7

8
−15
10

8
2
−2
−5
5

15
−35
−35
6
6

GR10.
GR11.
GR12.
GR13.
GR14.

Factoring Polynomials
Objectives

Videos for
this Section

1

Identify and factor out the greatest common monomial factor.

2

Factor trinomials with a leading coefficient of 1.

3

Factor perfect-square trinomials.

4

Factor the difference of squares.

5

Factor the difference and sum of cubes.

6

Factor by grouping.

7

Factor trinomials.

Profit from Research and Development
The finance department of a major drug company (anticipating a pandemic) projects that
an investment of x million dollars in research
and development for a specific type of vaccine
will return a profit (or loss) of 0.012 x 3 − 32.928
million dollars.
The company would have a “startup” cost
of $12 million and is prepared to invest up to $24
million at a rate of $1 million per year. You could
probably stare at this polynomial for a long time
without getting a clear picture of what kind of
return to expect from different investments. In Example 7, we use the methods of this section to rewrite
this profit–loss polynomial, making it easy to explain the result of investing various amounts.

Objective 1
Multiply ( x + 3 ) and ( x − 3 )
( x + 3 )( x − 3 ) = x 2 − 9

Factor x 2 − 9

The Greatest Common Monomial Factor
The process of factoring polynomials that we study in this section “reverses” the process of
multiplying polynomials that we studied in the previous section. To factor any sum of
terms means to write it as a product of factors. Consider the product
( x + 3 )( x − 3 ) =

x 2 − 9.

40

Chapter P Basic Concepts of Algebra

The polynomials ( x + 3 ) and ( x − 3 ) are called factors of the polynomial x 2 − 9. So,
factoring is the opposite of multiplying. See the margin note on page 39. When factoring,
we start with one polynomial and write it as a product of other polynomials. The polynomials in the product are the factors of the given polynomial.
The first thing to look for when factoring a polynomial is a factor that is common to
every term. This common factor can be “factored out” by the distributive property,
ab + ac = a ( b + c ).

Factoring Out a Monomial
In this section, we are concerned only with polynomials having integer coefficients. This
restriction is called factoring over the integers.
SIDE NOTE
Because 1 is a factor of every
expression, when factoring we
ignore 1 as a common factor.

Polynomial
9 + 18 y
2y 2 + 6y
7 x 4 + 3x 3 + x 2
5x + 3

Common Factor
9
2y
x2
No common factor

Factored Form
9(1 + 2 y )
2y ( y + 3 )
x 2 ( 7 x 2 + 3x + 1)
5x + 3

You can verify that any factorization is correct by multiplying the factors. We factored
these polynomials by finding the greatest common monomial factor of their terms.
Finding the Greatest Common Monomial Factor
The term ax n is the greatest common monomial factor (GCF) of a polynomial in x
(with integer coefficients) if
1. a is the greatest integer that divides each of the polynomial coefficients.
2. n is the least exponent on x found in every term of the polynomial.
EXAMPLE 1

Factoring by Using the GCF

Factor.
a. 16 x 3 + 24 x 2    b. 5 x 4 + 20 x 2 + 25 x    c. x 2 ( x − 3 ) + 7 ( x − 3 )

Solution
a. The greatest integer that divides both 16 and 24 is 8. The exponents on x are 3 and 2,
so 2 is the least exponent. So the GCF of 16 x 3 + 24 x 2 is 8 x 2 . We write
16 x 3 + 24 x 2 = 8 x 2 ( 2 x ) + 8 x 2 ( 3 ).
= 8 x 2 ( 2 x + 3 ).

Write each term as the product of
the GCF and another factor.
Use the distributive property to
factor out the GCF.

We can check the results of factoring by multiplying.
Check  8 x 2 ( 2 x + 3 ) = 8 x 2 ( 2 x ) + 8 x 2 ( 3 ) = 16 x 3 + 24 x 2 .

b. The greatest integer that divides 5, 20, and 25 is 5. The exponents on x are 4, 2, and
1 ( x = x 1 ), so 1 is the least exponent. So the GCF of 5 x 4 + 20 x 2 + 25 x is 5 x. We
write
5 x 4 + 20 x 2 + 25 x = 5 x ( x 3 ) + 5 x ( 4 x ) + 5 x ( 5 ) = 5 x ( x 3 + 4 x + 5 ).
You should check this result by multiplying.
c. In this case, the GCF is the common binomial factor x − 3. So,
x 2 ( x − 3 ) + 7 ( x − 3 ) = ( x − 3 )( x 2 + 7 ).

Factor out the common
binomial factor.

Practice Problem 1. Factor. a. 6 x 5 + 14 x 3   b. 7 x 5 + 21x 4 + 35 x 2
c. 5 x 2 ( x − y ) + 2 ( x − y ) 

Section P.4 Factoring Polynomials

41

Polynomials that cannot be factored as a product of two polynomials (excluding the
constant polynomials 1 and −1) are said to be irreducible. A polynomial is said to be
factored completely when it is written as a product consisting of only irreducible factors.
We allow repeated irreducible factors to be written as a power of a single factor.

Objective 2

Factoring Trinomials of the Form x 2 + Bx + C
Recall that ( x + a )( x + b ) = x 2 + ( a + b ) x + ab.
We reverse the sides of this equation to get the form used for factoring
x 2 + ( a + b ) x + ab = ( x + a )( x + b ).
To factor the quadratic trinomial x 2 + Bx + C into a product ( x + a )( x + b ) we compare the expansions:
a·b5C

(x 1 a)(x 1 b) 5 x2 1 (a 1 b) · x 1 a · b 5 x2 1 B · x 1 C.

a1b5B

Our goal is to find two integers a and b such that a ⋅ b = C and a + b = B.
Step 1
Step 2

List all pairs of integers a and b such that a ⋅ b = C.
From the list choose the pair a and b such that a + b = B.

Considering the sign of C can help you in narrowing down the list of factors to consider.
If there are no factors a and b of C such that a + b = B, the trinomial x 2 + Bx + C cannot be factored as a product ( x + a )( x + b ) with integer coefficients. That means,
x 2 + Bx + C is irreducible.

SIDE NOTE
To factor a trinomial in
standard form with a leading
coefficient of 1, we need two
integers a and b whose product
is the constant term and whose
sum is the coefficient of the
middle term.

EXAMPLE 2

Factoring x 2 + Bx + C by Using the Factors of C

Factor.
a. x 2 + 8 x + 15

b. x 2 − 6 x − 16

c. x 2 + x + 2

Solution
To factor x 2 + Bx + C, we look for two integers a and b such that ab = C and
a + b = B.
a. We want integers a and b such that ab = 15 and a + b = 8.
Factors of 15

1, 15

−1, −15

3, 5

−3, −5

Sum of factors

16

−16

8

−8

Because the factors 3 and 5 of 15 in the third column have a sum of 8,
x 2 + 8 x + 15 = ( x + 3 )( x + 5 ).
You should check this answer by multiplying.
b. We must find two integers a and b with ab = −16 and a + b = −6.
Factors of −16
Sum of factors

−1, 16 −2, 8
15

6

−4, 4 1, −16 2, −8

4, −4

−15

0

0

−6

42

Chapter P Basic Concepts of Algebra

Because the factors 2 and −8 of −16 in the fifth column give a sum of −6,
x 2 − 6 x − 16 = ( x + 2 )[ x + ( −8 ) ] = ( x + 2 )( x − 8 ).
You should check this answer by multiplying.
c. We must find two integers a and b with ab = 2 and a + b = 1.
Factors of 2

1, 2

−1, −2

Sum of factors

3

−3

The coefficient of the middle term, 1, does not appear as the sum of any of the factors
of the constant term, 2. Therefore, x 2 + x + 2 is irreducible.
Practice Problem 2. Factor.

a. x 2 + 6 x + 8    b. x 2 − 3 x − 10 

Factoring Formulas
We investigate how other types of polynomials can be factored by reversing the product
formulas on page 36.
Factoring Formulas
A and B represent any algebraic expression.
Difference of squares

A 2 − B 2 = ( A + B )( A − B )
A 2 + 2 AB + B 2

Perfect square, positive middle term

2

Perfect square, negative middle term

= ( A + B)

A 2 − 2 AB + B 2 = ( A − B )

Objective 3

2

A 3 − B 3 = ( A − B )( A 2 + AB + B 2 )

Difference of cubes

A 3 + B 3 = ( A + B )( A 2 − AB + B 2 )

Sum of cubes

Perfect-Square Trinomials
To factor a perfect square trinomial, we use the special products
A 2 + 2 AB + B 2 = ( A + B ) 2
EXAMPLE 3

and

A 2 − 2 AB + B 2 = ( A − B ) 2.

Factoring a Perfect-Square Trinomial

x 2 + 10 x + 25    b. 16 x 2 − 8 x + 1

SIDE NOTE

Factor. a.

You should check your answer
to any factoring problem by
multiplying the factors to verify
that the result is the original
expression.

Solution
a. The first term, x 2 , and the third term, 25 = 5 2 , are perfect squares. Further, the
middle term is twice the product of the terms being squared, that is, 10 x = 2 ( 5 x ).
x 2 + 10 x + 25 = x 2 + 2 ⋅ 5 ⋅ x + 5 2 = ( x + 5 ) 2
b. The first term, 16 x 2 = ( 4 x ) 2 , and the third term, 1 = 1 2 , are perfect squares. Further, the middle term is the negative of twice the product of the terms being squared,
that is, −8 x = −2 ( 4 x )( 1 ).
16 x 2 − 8 x + 1 = ( 4 x ) 2 − 2 ( 4 x )( 1 ) + 1 2 = ( 4 x − 1 ) 2
Practice Problem 3. Factor.

Objective 4

a. x 2 + 4 x + 4     b. 9 x 2 − 6 x + 1

Difference of Squares
To factor the difference of squares, we use the reverse of the special product
A 2 − B 2 = ( A + B )( A − B ).

Section P.4 Factoring Polynomials

EXAMPLE 4
Factor.

43

Factoring the Difference of Squares

a. x 2 − 4     b. 25 x 2 − 49

Solution
a. We write x 2 − 4 as the difference of squares.
x 2 − 4 = x 2 − 2 2 = ( x + 2 )( x − 2 )
b. We write 25 x 2 − 49 as the difference of squares.
25 x 2 − 49 = ( 5 x ) 2 − 7 2 = ( 5 x + 7 )( 5 x − 7 )
Practice Problem 4. Factor.

a. x 2 − 16    b. 4 x 2 − 25

What about the sum of two squares? Let’s try to factor x 2 + 2 2 = x 2 + 4. Notice that
= x 2 + 0 ⋅ x + 4 so that the middle term is 0 = 0 ⋅ x. We need two factors, a
and b, of 4 whose sum is zero ( a + b = 0 ).
x2 + 4

Factors of 4

1, 4

−1, −4

2, 2

−2, −2

Sum of factors

5

−5

4

−4

Because no sum of factors is 0, x 2 + 4 is irreducible. A similar result holds regardless of what
integer replaces 2 in the process. Consequently, x 2 + a 2 is irreducible for any integer a.
Some Irreducible Polynomials
If a and c are integers having no common factors, then
ax + c is irreducible and x 2 + a 2 is irreducible.

EXAMPLE 5
Factor

Using the Difference of Squares Twice

x 4 − 16.

Solution
We write x 4 − 16 as the difference of squares.
x 4 − 16 = ( x 2 ) 2 − 4 2 = ( x 2 + 4 )( x 2 − 4 )
From Example 4, part a, we know that x 2 − 4 = ( x + 2 )( x − 2 ). Consequently,
x 4 − 16 = ( x 2 + 4 )( x 2 − 4 )
= ( x 2 + 4 )( x + 2 )( x − 2 ).

Replace x 2 − 4 with ( x + 2 )( x − 2 ).

Because x 2 + 4, x + 2, and x − 2 are irreducible, x 4 − 16 is completely factored.
Practice Problem 5. Factor

Objective 5

x 4 − 81.

Difference and Sum of Cubes
We can also use the reverse of the special-product formulas to factor the difference and
sum of cubes.
same sign

A 3 − B 3 = ( A − B )( A 2 + AB + B 2 )

Difference of cubes

different sign
same sign

A 3 + B 3 = ( A + B )( A 2 − AB + B 2 )
different sign

Sum of cubes

44

Chapter P Basic Concepts of Algebra

EXAMPLE 6

Factoring the Difference and Sum of Cubes

Factor. a. x 3 − 64     b. 8 x 3 + 125

Solution
a. We write x 3 − 64 as the difference of cubes.
x 3 − 64 = x 3 − 4 3 = ( x − 4) ( x 2 + 4 x + 16 )
b. We write 8 x 3 + 125 as the sum of cubes.
8 x 3 + 125 = ( 2 x )3 + 5 3 = ( 2 x + 5 )( 4 x 2 − 10 x + 25 )
Practice Problem 6. Factor.
EXAMPLE 7

a. x 3 − 125    b. 27 x 3 + 8 

Determining Profit from Research and Development

Profit in millions of dollars

In the beginning of this section, we introduced the polynomial 0.012 x 3 − 32.928 that gave
the profit (or loss) a drug company would have after an investment of x million dollars. If the
company had an initial investment of $12 million and invests an additional $1 million each year,
determine when this investment returns a profit. What will the profit (or loss) be in six years?

Solution
First, notice that 0.012 is a common factor of both terms of the polynomial because
32.928 = ( 0.012 )( 2744 ). We now factor 0.012 x 3 − 32.928 as follows:

50
40
30
20

16.224

10

0.000

0

7.572

0.012 x 3 − 32.928 = 0.012 x 3 − ( 0.012 )( 2744 )
= 0.012 ( x 3 − 2744 )

210 26.564
220

1

2

3

4
Years

5

=

6

0.012 ( x 3 − 14 3 )

Factor out 0.012.
2744 = 14 3

= 0.012 ( x − 14 )( x 2 + 14 x + 196 ). Difference of cubes
This product has three factors, and the factor x 2 + 14 x + 196 is positive for positive values of x because each term is positive. The sign of the factor x − 14 then determines the
sign of the entire polynomial. The factor x − 14 is negative if x is less than 14, zero if x
equals 14, and positive if x is greater than 14. Consequently, the company receives a profit
when x is greater than 14. Because the initial investment is $12 million, with an additional
$1 million invested each year, it will be two years before the company breaks even on this
venture. Every year thereafter it will profit from the investment. In six years, the company
will have invested the initial $12 million plus an additional $6 million ($1 million per year).
So the total investment is $18 million. To find the profit (or loss) with $18 million invested,
we let x = 18 in the profit–loss polynomial: 0.012 ( 18 )3 − 32.928 = $37.056 million.
The company will have made a profit of over $37 million in six years.
Practice Problem 7. In Example 7, what will the profit be in four years?

Objective 6

Factoring by Grouping
For polynomials having four terms and a GCF of 1, when none of the preceding factoring
techniques apply, we can sometimes group the terms in such a way that each group has a
common factor. This technique is called factoring by grouping.
EXAMPLE 8

Factoring by Grouping

Factor. a. x 3 + 2 x 2 + 3 x + 6  b. 6 x 3 − 3 x 2 − 4 x + 2  c. x 2 + 4 x + 4 − y 2

Solution
a. x 3 + 2 x 2 + 3 x + 6 = ( x 3 + 2 x 2 ) + ( 3 x + 6 )

Group terms so that each
group can be factored.

= x 2 ( x + 2 ) + 3( x + 2 )

Factor the grouped binomials.

= ( x + 2 )( x 2 + 3 )

Factor out the common
binomial factor x + 2.

Section P.4 Factoring Polynomials

b. 6 x 3 − 3 x 2 − 4 x + 2 = ( 6 x 3 − 3 x 2 ) + ( −4 x + 2 )

45

Group terms so that each
group can be factored.

= 3 x 2 ( 2 x − 1 ) + ( −2 )( 2 x − 1 )

Factor the grouped
binomials.
Factor out the common
binomial factor 2 x − 1.

= ( 2 x − 1 )( 3 x 2 − 2 )
c. x 2 + 4 x + 4 − y 2 = ( x 2 + 4 x + 4 ) − y 2

Group terms so that each
group can be factored.

= ( x + 2 )2 − y 2

Factor the trinomial.

= ( x + 2 − y )( x + 2 + y )

Difference of squares

Practice Problem 8. Factor.
a. x 3 + 3 x 2 + x + 3  b. 28 x 3 − 20 x 2 − 7 x + 5  c. x 2 − y 2 − 2 y − 1 

EXAMPLE 9

Factoring by Making a Perfect Square

Factor: x 4 + 3 x 2 + 4.

Solution
Notice that a change in the middle term would give the perfect square
2
( x 2 + 2 ) = x 4 + 4 x 2 + 4.
x 4 + 3x 2 + 4 = x 4 + 4 x 2 − x 2 + 4
=

3x 2 = 4 x 2 − x 2

x 4 + 4x 2 + 4 − x 2

Rewrite.

2

= ( x 2 + 2) − x 2

x 4 + 4 x 2 + 4 = ( x 2 + 2) 2

= ( x 2 + 2 + x )( x 2 + 2 − x )

Difference of two squares

= ( x 2 + x + 2 )( x 2 − x + 2 )

Rewrite in standard form.

Practice Problem 9. Factor: x 4 + 5 x 2 + 9.

Objective 7

Factoring Trinomials of the Form Ax 2 + Bx + C
To factor the trinomial Ax 2 + Bx + C as ( ax + b )( cx + d ), we use FOIL and combine
like terms to get Ax 2 + Bx + C = acx 2 + ( ad + bc ) x + bd. Notice that
AC = acbd = ( ad )( bc ) and B = ad + bc.
To factor the quadratic trinomial Ax 2 + Bx + C into a product ( ax + b )( cx + d ),
we compare the expansions:
ad · bc 5 ac · bd 5 A · C

(a x 1 b)(c x 1 d) 5 a c · x2 1 (a d 1 b c)x 1 b d 5 A · x2 1 B · x 1 C.
F
O
I
L
ad 1 bc 5 B

Our goal is to find two integer factors of the product A ⋅ C (that would be ad ⋅ bc) whose
sum ( ad + bc ) is B.
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3
Step 4

List all pairs of integers whose product is A ⋅ C .
From the list choose the pair whose sum is B.
Split the term Bx according to the sum from Step 2.
Group terms and factor out the common factor.

46

Chapter P Basic Concepts of Algebra

If there are no two integer factors of A ⋅ C whose sum is B, the trinomial Ax 2 + Bx + C
cannot be factored as a product ( ax + b )( cx + d ) with integer coefficients. That means,
Ax 2 + Bx + C is irreducible.
EXAMPLE 10
Factor. a.

Factoring Using FOIL and Grouping

4 x 2 + 16 x − 9    b.

6 x 2 + 17 x + 7    c. 4 x 2 − 4 x − 11

Solution
a. Ax 2 + Bx + C = 4 x 2 + 16 x − 9. We have
A ⋅ C = 4 ⋅ ( −9 ) = − 36 = ( +1 ) ⋅ ( + 36 ) = ( + 2 ) ⋅ ( +18 ) = ( + 3 ) ⋅ ( +12 ) = ( + 4 ) ⋅ ( + 9 ).
So
Factors of −36
Sum of factors

−1, 36 1, −36 −2, 18 2, −18 −3, 12 3, −12
−35

35

16

−16

−4, 9

4, −9

5

−5

−9

9

Based on the above we will use: 16 x = −2 x + 18 x .
4 x 2 + 16 x − 9 = 4 x 2 − 2 x + 18 x − 9
= ( 4 x 2 − 2 x ) + ( 18 x − 9 )
= 2 x ( 2 x − 1 ) + 9( 2 x − 1 )
= ( 2 x − 1 )( 2 x + 9 )

16 x = −2 x + 18 x
Group terms.
Factor out common terms.
Distributive property

b. Ax 2 + Bx + C = 6 x 2 + 17 x + 7. We have
A ⋅ C = 6 ⋅ 7 = 42 = ( + 1 ) ⋅ ( + 42 ) = ( + 2 ) ⋅ ( + 21 ) = ( + 3 ) ⋅ ( + 14 ) = ( + 6 ) ⋅ ( + 7 ).
So
Factors of 42

1, 42 −1, −42 2, 21 −2, −21 3, 14 −3, −14

Sum of factors

43

−43

23

−23

17

−17

6, 7

−6, −7

13

−13

Based on the above we will use: 17 x = 3 x + 14 x .
6 x 2 + 17 x + 7 = 6 x 2 + 3 x + 14 x + 7
= (6 x 2 + 3 x ) + (14 x + 7)
= 3 x ( 2 x + 1 ) + 7( 2 x + 1 )
= (2 x + 1)(3 x + 7)

17 x = 3 x + 14 x
Group terms.
Factor out common terms.
Distributive property

c. Ax 2 + Bx + C = 4 x 2 − 4 x − 11. We have
A ⋅ C = 4 ⋅ ( −11 ) = −44 = ( + 1 ) ⋅ ( + 44 ) = ( + 2 ) ⋅ ( + 22 ) = ( + 4 ) ⋅ ( + 11 ).
So
Factors of 44

−1, 44

1, −44

−2, 22

2, −22

−4, 11

4, −11

Sum of factors

43

−43

20

−20

−13

13

The coefficient of the middle term, −4, does not appear as the sum of any of the factors of A ⋅ C . Therefore, 4 x 2 − 4 x − 11 is irreducible. Actually as we will see later in
Section 1.3: 4 x 2 − 4 x − 11 = 4 ( x − 12 − 3 )( x − 12 + 3 ).
Practice Problem 10. factor:

a. 5 x 2 + 11x + 2.   b. 4 x 2 + x − 3. 

Section P.4 Factoring Polynomials

P.4

47

Exercises

Concepts and Vocabulary
1. The polynomials x + 2 and x − 2 are called ______________
of the polynomial x 2 − 4.
2. The polynomial 3 y is the ______________ factor of the
polynomial 3 y 2 + 6 y.
3. The GCF of the polynomial 10 x 3 + 30 x 2 is ______________.
4. A polynomial that cannot be factored as a product of two
polynomials (excluding the constant polynomials ±1) is said
to be ______________.
5. True or False. When factoring a polynomial whose leading
coefficient is positive, we need to consider only its positive
factors.

In Exercises 57–64, factor each polynomial as a perfect
square.
57. x 2 + 6 x + 9
58. x 2 + 8 x + 16
59. 9 x 2 + 6 x + 1

60. 36 x 2 + 12 x + 1

25 x 2 − 20 x + 4

62. 64 x 2 + 32 x + 4

63. 49 x 2 + 42 x + 9

64. 9 x 2 + 24 x + 16

61.

In Exercises 65–74, factor each polynomial using the
difference-of-squares pattern.
65. x 2 − 64
66. x 2 − 121
67. 4 x 2 − 1
16 x 2 − 9

68. 9 x 2 − 1
70. 25 x 2 − 49

6. True or False. The polynomial x 2 + 7 is irreducible.

69.

7. True or False. The polynomial x 2 − 4 is irreducible.

71. x 4 − 1

8. True or False. Factoring is the opposite of multiplying.

73.

Building Skills

In Exercises 75–84, factor each polynomial using the
sum-or-difference-of-cubes pattern.
75. x 3 + 64
76. x 3 + 125

In Exercises 9–26, factor each polynomial by factoring out
the GCF.
9. 8 x − 24
10. 5 x + 25

20 x 4

−5

72. x 4 − 81
74. 12 x 4 − 75

77. x 3 − 27

78. x 3 − 216

8 − x3

80. 27 − x 3

81. 8 x 3 − 27

82. 8 x 3 − 125

40 x 3 + 5

84. 7 x 3 + 56

79.

11. −6 x 2 + 12 x

12. −3 x 2 + 21

13. 7 x 2 + 14 x 3

14. 9 x 3 − 18 x 4

15. x 4 + 2 x 3 + x 2

16. x 4 − 5 x 3 + 7 x 2

17. 3 x 3 − x 2

18. 2 x 3 + 2 x 2

19. 8ax 3 + 4 ax 2

20. ax 4 − 2ax 2 + ax

In Exercises 85–92, factor by making a perfect square.
85. x 4 + x 2 + 25
86. x 4 + x 2 + 1

21. x ( x − y ) + 3( x − y )
23. 3 x ( 2 x + y ) + 5 y ( 2 x + y )

22. 2a ( a + 1 ) − 3( a + 1 )

87. x 4 + 15 x 2 + 64

88. x 4 − 7 x 2 + 9

24. 2 x ( 5 x − 3 y ) + 7 y ( 5 x − 3 y )

89. x 4 − x 2 + 16

90. x 4 − 16 x 2 + 36

2

25. ( y + 2 ) − 3( y + 2 )

2

26. ( y + 1 ) + ( y + 1 )

In Exercises 27–36, factor by grouping.
27. x 3 + 3 x 2 + x + 3
28. x 3 + 5 x 2 + x + 5

83.

91.

x4

+4

92. x 4 + 64

29. x 3 − 5 x 2 + x − 5

30. x 3 − 7 x 2 + x − 7

In Exercises 93–124, factor each polynomial completely. If a
polynomial cannot be factored, state that it is irreducible.
93. 1 − 16 x 2
94. 4 − 25 x 2

31. 6 x 3 + 4 x 2 + 3 x + 2

32. 3 x 3 + 6 x 2 + x + 2

95. x 2 − 6 x + 9

96. x 2 − 8 x + 16

33. 12 x 7 + 4 x 5 + 3 x 4 + x 2

34. 3 x 7 + 3 x 5 + x 4 + x 2

97. 4 x 2 + 4 x + 1

98. 16 x 2 + 8 x + 1

36. 2a 2 x − b − bx + 2a 2

2 x 2 − 8 x − 10

100. 5 x 2 − 10 x − 40

101. 2 x 2 + 3 x − 20

102. 2 x 2 − 7 x − 30

x 2 − 24 x + 36

104. x 2 − 20 x + 25

35. xy + ab + bx + ay

In Exercises 37–56, factor each trinomial or state that it is
irreducible.
37. x 2 + 7 x + 12
38. x 2 + 8 x + 15
39. x 2 − 6 x + 8

40. x 2 − 9 x + 14

41. x 2 − 3 x − 4

42. x 2 − 5 x − 6

43. x 2 − 4 x + 13

44. x 2 − 2 x + 5

45. 2 x 2 + x − 36

46. 2 x 2 + 3 x − 27

47. 6 x 2 + 17 x + 12

48. 8 x 2 − 10 x − 3

49. 3 x 2 − 11x − 4

50. 5 x 2 + 7 x + 2

51. 6 x 2 − 3 x + 4

52. 4 x 2 − 4 x + 3

53. x 2 − xy − 20 y 2

54. 8 p 2 − 2 pq − 15q 2

55. 15 x 2 − 28 + x

56. 24 y + 35 + 4 y 2

99.
103.

105. 3 x 5 + 12 x 4 + 12 x 3
107.

9x 2 − 1

109. 16 x 2 + 24 x + 9
111.

x2

+ 15

113. 45 x 3 + 8 x 2 − 4 x

106. 2 x 5 + 16 x 4 + 32 x 3
108. 16 x 2 − 25
110. 4 x 2 + 20 x + 25
112. x 2 + 24
114. 25 x 3 + 40 x 2 − 9 x

ax 2 − 7a 2 x − 8a 3

116. ax 2 − 10 a 2 x − 24 a 3

117. x 2 − 16a 2 + 8 x + 16

118. x 2 − 36a 2 + 6 x + 9

115.
119.

3 x 5 + 12 x 4 y + 12 x 3 y 2

121. x 2 − 25a 2 + 4 x + 4
123.

18 x 6

+ 12 x 5 y + 2 x 4 y 2

120. 4 x 5 + 24 x 4 y + 36 x 3 y 2
122. x 2 − 16a 2 + 4 x + 4
124. 12 x 6 + 12 x 5 y + 3 x 4 y 2

48

Chapter P Basic Concepts of Algebra

Applying the Concepts
125. Garden area. A rectangular garden must have a perimeter of
16 feet. Write a completely factored polynomial whose value
gives the area of the garden, assuming that one side is x feet.
126. Serving tray dimensions. A rectangular serving tray must
have a perimeter of 42 inches. Write a completely factored
polynomial whose value gives the area of the tray, assuming
that one side is x inches.
127. Stock investment. Mateo has invested in a stock projected
to increase in value over the next several months. The expression 10 x 3 − 30 x 2 − 90 x − 50 gives Mateo’s profit or loss
in dollars after x months.
a. When will Mateo break even?
b. What is the profit or loss after 10 months?
128. Profit and loss. A company expects to recover its initial
investment and rapidly earn a profit from a new app it developed. The expression 90 x 3 − 360 x 2 + 630 x − 2520 gives
the profit or loss in dollars after x months.
a. When will the company break even?
b. What is the profit or loss after 10 months?
129. Box construction. A box with an open top is to be constructed from a rectangular piece of cardboard with length
36 inches and width 16 inches by cutting out squares of equal
side length x at each corner and then folding up the sides,
as shown in the accompanying figure. Write a completely
factored polynomial whose value gives the volume of the box
( volume = length × width × height ).
36 in
x

x

x

x

133. Grazing pens. A rancher has 2800 feet of fencing that
will fence off a rectangular grazing pen for cattle. One
edge of the pen borders a straight river and needs no fence.
Assuming that the edges of the pen perpendicular to the
river are x feet long, write a completely factored polynomial
whose value gives the area of the pen.

x

x

134. Centerpiece perimeter. A decorative glass centerpiece for
a table has the shape of a rectangle with a semicircular section
attached at each end, as shown in the figure. The perimeter of
the figure is 48 inches. Write a completely factored polynomial whose value gives the area of the centerpiece.

16 in
x

x
x

x

130. Surface area. For the box described in Exercises 129, write
a completely factored polynomial whose value gives its surface
area (surface area = sum of the areas of the five sides).
131. Area of a washer. As shown in the figure, a washer is
made by removing a circular disk from the center of another
circular disk of radius 2 cm. Assuming that the disk that is
removed has radius x, write a completely factored polynomial
whose value gives the area of the washer.

x cm

132. Insulation. Insulation must be put in the space between two
concentric cylinders. Write a completely factored polynomial
whose value gives the volume between the inner and outer
cylinders if the inner cylinder has radius 3 feet, the outer cylinder has radius x feet, and both cylinders are 8 feet high.

x
2

x

x

x
2

Beyond the Basics
In Exercises 135–142, factor each expression.
135. x 3 + y 3 + x + y
136. x 4 − 11x 2 + 1 [Hint: x 4 − 11x 2 + 1 = ( x 2 − 1 ) 2 − 9 x 2 .]
137. x 4 + y 4 + x 2 y 2
138. x 4 + 4 y 4
6
139. x − 64
140. x 6 − 26 x 3 − 27
2
141. ( x 2 − 3 x ) − 38( x 2 − 3 x ) − 80
142. 4 x 2 − y 2 − z 2 + 2 yz
143. In Exercise 110 of Section P.3, page 38, you were asked to
show that if a + b + c = 0, then a 3 + b 3 + c 3 = 3abc.
Now show that:
If a 3 + b 3 + c 3 = 3abc, then prove that either
a + b + c = 0 or a = b = c. [Hint: From Exercises 109
and 110, page 38, we have a 3 + b 3 + c 3 − 3abc =
( a + b + c )( a 2 + b 2 + c 2 − ab − bc − ca )
1
= ( a + b + c )[ ( a − b ) 2 + ( b − c ) 2 + ( c − a ) 2 ). ]
2
144. Factor ( x − y )3 + ( y − z )3 + ( z − x )3 .
145. Factor z 3 ( x − y )3 + x 3 ( y − z )3 + y 3 ( z − x )3 .
146. Simplify

3

3

(x2 − y2 ) + (y2 − z2 ) + (z2 − x2 )
(x − y)

3

3

+ (y − z) + (z − x)

3

3

.

Section P.5 Rational Expressions

GETTING READY

49

for the Next Section

REVIEW CONCEPTS
Properties of fractions (Section P.1, page 13)
Factoring polynomials (Section P.4)
REVIEW SKILLS
Factoring (Section P.4)
GR1. 3 x 2 + 9

GR2. 21x − 7 x 2

GR3. x 2 + 2 x − 15

GR4. x 2 − 5 x + 4

P.5

Properties of fractions (Section P.1, pages 13 and 14)
In Exercises GR5–GR8, factor the numerator and denominator and eliminate common factors.
GR5.

2x
4x + 6

GR6.

2 x 3 + 3x
x2 + x

GR7.

x 2 + 3x + 2
x 2 + 4x + 3

GR8.

x2 − x − 6
x2 − 4

Rational Expressions
Objectives

Videos for
this Section

1

Define rational expressions.

2

Reduce a rational expression to lowest terms.

3

Multiply and divide rational expressions.

4

Add and subtract rational expressions.

5

Identify and simplify complex fractions.

False Positive in Drug Testing
You are probably aware that the nonmedical use of steroids among adolescents
and young adults is an ongoing national
concern. In fact, many high schools have
required students involved in extracurricular activities to submit to random drug
testing. Many methods of drug testing are
in use, and those who administer the tests
are keenly aware of the possibility of what
is termed a “false positive,” which occurs
when someone who is not a drug user
tests positive for using drugs. How likely is
it that a student who tests positive actually
uses drugs? For a test that is 95% accurate, an expression for the likelihood that
a student who tests positive but is not a
drug user is
( 0.05 )( 1 − x )
,
0.95 x + ( 0.05 )( 1 − x )

where x is the percent of the student population that uses drugs. This is an example of a rational
expression, which we study in this section. In Example 1, we see that in a student population
among which only 5% of the students use drugs, the likelihood that a student who tests positive is
not a drug user is 50% when the test used is 95% accurate.

50

Chapter P Basic Concepts of Algebra

Objective 1

Rational Expressions

a
Recall that the quotient of two integers, ( b ≠ 0 ), is a rational number. The quotient of
b
two polynomials is called a rational expression. Following are examples of rational
expressions.
10 x + 2
x+6
7
x 2 + 2x − 3
,
,
,
, and
2
( x − 3 )( x + 4 )
17
3
x +1
x 2 + 5x
We use the same language to describe rational expressions that we use to describe ratiox 2 + 2x − 3
, we call x 2 + 2 x − 3 the numerator and x 2 + 5 x + 6
nal numbers. For 2
x + 5x + 6
the denominator. The domain of a rational expression is the set of all real numbers
2
except those that result in a zero denominator. For example, the domain of
is all
x −1
x+6
real x, x ≠ 1, in set notation, {x | x ≠ 1}. We write
, x ≠ 3, x ≠ −4 to
( x − 3 )( x + 4 )
indicate that 3 and −4 are not in the domain of this rational expression.
EXAMPLE 1

Calculating False Positives in Drug Testing

With a test that is 95% accurate, an expression for the likelihood that a student who tests
positive for drugs is a nonuser is
( 0.05 )( 1 − x )
,
0.95 x + ( 0.05 )( 1 − x )

where x is the percent (in decimal) of the student population that uses drugs. In a student
population among which only 5% of the students use drugs, find the likelihood that a student who tests positive is a nonuser.

Solution
We convert 5% to a decimal to get x = 0.05, and we replace x with 0.05 in the given
expression.
( 0.05 )( 1 − x )
( 0.05 )( 1 − 0.05 )
=
(
)
(
)
(
0.95 x + 0.05 1 − x
0.95 0.05 ) + ( 0.05 )( 1 − 0.05 )
= 0.50
Use a calculator.
So the likelihood that a student who tests positive is a nonuser when the test used is 95%
accurate is 50%. Because of the high rate of false positives, a more accurate test is needed.
Practice Problem 1. Rework Example 1 for a student population among which 10% of
the students use drugs.

Objective 2

Lowest Terms for a Rational Expression
A rational expression is reduced to its lowest terms or simplified if its numerator and
denominator have no common factor other than 1 or −1.

SIDE NOTE

Simplifying Rational Expressions

The following property of
fractions (see page 13)
ac
a
= , b ≠ 0, c ≠ 0
bc
b
is used to simplify rational
expressions.

To simplify a rational expression, we
1. Factor its numerator and denominator.
2. Divide the numerator and denominator by any common factors.
EXAMPLE 2

Reducing a Rational Expression to Lowest Terms

Simplify each expression.
a.

x 4 + 2x 3
, x ≠ −2
x+2

b.

x2 − x − 6
, x ≠ 0, x ≠ 3
x 3 − 3x 2

Section P.5 Rational Expressions

51

Solution
Factor each numerator and denominator and divide out the common factors.
a.

x3 ( x + 2)
x 4 + 2x 3
x3 ( x + 2)
=
=
= x3
( x + 2)
x+2
x+2

b.

( x + 2) ( x − 3)
( x + 2 )( x − 3 )
x2 − x − 6
x+2
=
=
=
x 3 − 3x 2
x 2 ( x − 3)
x 2 ( x − 3)
x2

Practice Problem 2. Simplify each expression.
a.

WARNING

Objective 3

2 x 3 + 8x 2
, x ≠ 0, x ≠ −4
3 x 2 + 12 x

b.

x2 − 4
x 2 + 4x + 4

, x ≠ −2 

x2 − 1
,
x 2 + 2x + 1
you cannot remove x 2 . You can remove only factors common to both the numerator and
denominator of a rational expression.

Because x 2 is a term, not a factor, in both the numerator and denominator of

Multiplication and Division of Rational Expressions
We use the same rules for multiplying and dividing rational expressions as we do for
rational numbers.

SIDE NOTE

Multiplication and Division

In working with the quotient
of two rational expressions
A
B = A ⋅ D three polynomials
C
B C
D
appear as denominators: B
and D from A and C and C
B
D
from A ⋅ D .
B C

For rational expressions

A
C
and ,
B
D

A⋅C
A C
⋅
=
B D
B⋅D

if B ≠ 0, D ≠ 0.

A
B = A ÷ C = A ⋅ D = AD
C
B
D
B C
BC
D

if B ≠ 0, C ≠ 0, D ≠ 0.

EXAMPLE 3

Multiplying and Dividing Rational Expressions

Multiply or divide as indicated. Simplify your answer and leave it in factored form.
a.

x 2 + 3x + 2 2 x 3 + 6 x
⋅ 2
,
x 3 + 3x
x + x−2

3 x 2 + 11x − 4
8 x 3 − 40 x 2
b.
,
3 x + 12
4 x 4 − 20 x 3

x ≠ 0, x ≠ 1, x ≠ −2

x ≠ 0, x ≠ 5, x ≠ −4

Solution
Factor each numerator and denominator and divide out the common factors.
a.

( x + 2 )( x + 1 )
2x ( x 2 + 3 )
x 2 + 3x + 2 2 x 3 + 6 x
⋅ 2
=
⋅
3
2
( x − 1 )( x + 2 )
x + 3x
x + x−2
x( x + 3)

=

( x + 2 ) ( x + 1 )( 2 x ) ( x 2 + 3 )

x ( x 2 + 3 ) ( x − 1) ( x + 2 )

=

2 ( x + 1)
x −1

52

Chapter P Basic Concepts of Algebra

SIDE NOTE
The best strategy to use when
multiplying and dividing rational
expressions is to factor each
numerator and denominator
completely and then divide out
the common factors.

3 x 2 + 11x − 4
3
2
3 x 2 + 11x − 4 4 x 4 − 20 x 3 ( x + 4 )( 3 x − 1 ) 4 x 3 ( x − 5 )
b. 8 x − 40 x
=
⋅
=
⋅
3 x + 12
3( x + 4 )
8 x 3 − 40 x 2
3 x + 12
8x 2 ( x − 5 )
4 x 4 − 20 x 3
x

=

( x + 4 ) ( 3x − 1) ( 4 x 3 ) ( x − 5 )

8x 2 ( x − 5 ) ( 3 ) ( x + 4 )
2

=

( 3x − 1) x

6

=

x ( 3x − 1)
6

Practice Problem 3. Multiply or divide as indicated. Simplify your answer.
x 2 − 2x − 3
7 x 3 + 28 x 2
4x + 4
2 x 4 + 8x 3

Objective 4

x ≠ 0, x ≠ −4, x ≠ −1 

Addition and Subtraction of Rational Expressions
To add and subtract rational expressions, we use the same rules as for adding and subtracting rational numbers.
Addition and Subtraction of Rational Expressions
For rational expressions

A
C
and (same denominator D ≠ 0),
D
D

A
C
A+C
+
=
D
D
D
For rational expressions

A
C
and
B
D

and

( B ≠ 0, D ≠ 0 ) ,

A
C
AD + BC
+
=
B
D
BD

EXAMPLE 4

A
C
A−C
−
=
.
D
D
D

and

A
C
AD − BC
−
=
.
B
D
BD

Adding and Subtracting Rational Expressions
with the Same Denominator

Add or subtract as indicated. Simplify your answer and leave both the numerator and
denominator in factored form.
a.
b.

x−6
( x + 1)2

+

x+8
( x + 1)2

,

x ≠ −1

3x − 2
2x + 1
,
− 2
x 2 − 5x + 6
x − 5x + 6

x ≠ 2, x ≠ 3

Solution
x−6
x+8
x−6+ x+8
2x + 2
a.
+
=
=
( x + 1)2
( x + 1)2
( x + 1) 2
( x + 1)2
2 ( x + 1)
2
=
=
( x + 1) ( x + 1)
x+1
b.

( 3x − 2 ) − ( 2 x + 1)
3x − 2
2x + 1
3x − 2 − 2 x − 1
− 2
=
=
x 2 − 5x + 6
x − 5x + 6
x 2 − 5x + 6
x 2 − 5x + 6
x−3
x−3
1
=
=
=
( x − 2 )( x − 3 )
( x − 2) ( x − 3)
x−2

Section P.5 Rational Expressions

53

Practice Problem 4. Add or subtract as indicated. Simplify your answers.
5 x + 22
2 ( x + 10 )
a. 2
+
, x ≠ 6, x ≠ −6
x − 36
x 2 − 36
b.

4x + 1
3x + 4
− 2
,
x 2 + x − 12
x + x − 12

x ≠ −4, x ≠ 3 

When adding or subtracting rational expressions with different denominators, we proceed (as with fractions) by finding a common denominator. The one most convenient to
use is called the least common denominator (LCD), and it is the polynomial of least
degree that contains each denominator as a factor. In the simplest case, the LCD is the
product of the denominators.
EXAMPLE 5

Adding and Subtracting When Denominators Have
No Common Factor

Add or subtract as indicated. Simplify your answer and leave it in factored form.
2x
x
x
2x − 1
a.
+
, x ≠ −1, x ≠ −3
b.
−
, x ≠ −1, x ≠ −2
x+1 x+2
x+1
x+3

Solution
( 2 x − 1 )( x + 1 )
2x − 1
x
x( x + 3)
a.
+
=
+
( x + 1 )( x + 3 )
( x + 1 )( x + 3 )
x+1
x+3
x ( x + 3 ) + ( 2 x − 1 )( x + 1 )
=
( x + 1 )( x + 3 )
2
x + 3x + 2 x 2 + 2 x − x − 1
=
( x + 1 )( x + 3 )
3x 2 + 4 x − 1
=
( x + 1 )( x + 3 )
b.

2x
x
2x ( x + 2 )
x ( x + 1)
−
=
−
( x + 1 )( x + 2 )
( x + 1 )( x + 2 )
x+1 x+2

LCD =
( x + 1 )( x + 3 )

LCD =
( x + 1 )( x + 2 )

2 x ( x + 2 ) − x ( x + 1)
2x 2 + 4 x − x 2 − x
=
( x + 1 )( x + 2 )
( x + 1 )( x + 2 )
x ( x + 3)
x 2 + 3x
=
=
( x + 1 )( x + 2 )
( x + 1 )( x + 2 )
=

Practice Problem 5. Add or subtract as indicated. Simplify your answers.
a.

2x
3x
, x ≠ −2, x ≠ 5
+
x+2
x−5

b.

5x
2x
−
, x ≠ 4, x ≠ −3 
x−4
x+3

To Find the LCD for Rational Expressions
1. Factor each denominator polynomial completely.
2. Form a product of the distinct irreducible factors of each polynomial. (Each distinct
factor is used once.)
3. Attach to each factor in this product the greatest exponent that appears on this
factor in any of the factored denominators.

EXAMPLE 6

Finding the LCD for Rational Expressions

Find the LCD for each pair of rational expressions.
a.

x+2
3x + 7
,
x ( x − 1) 2 ( x + 2 ) 4 x 2 ( x + 2 )3

b.

x+1
2 x − 13
,
x2 − x − 6 x2 − 9

54

Chapter P Basic Concepts of Algebra

Solution
a. Step 1
Step 2
Step 3
b. Step 1
Step 2
Step 3

The denominators are already completely factored.
4 x ( x − 1 )( x + 2 )
LCD =

Product of the different factors

4 x 2 ( x − 1) 2 ( x + 2 )3

The greatest exponents are 2, 2, and 3.

x2 − x − 6

= ( x + 2 )( x − 3 )
x 2 − 9 = ( x + 3 )( x − 3 )

( x + 2 )( x − 3 )( x + 3 )

LCD = ( x + 2 )( x − 3 )( x + 3 )

Product of the different factors
The greatest exponent
on each factor is 1.

Practice Problem 6. Find the LCD for each pair of rational expressions.
a.

x 2 + 3x
x 2 ( x + 2 )2 ( x − 2 )

,

4x 2 + 1
3x ( x − 2 )2

b.

2x − 1
3 − 7x 2
,

2
2
x − 25 ( x + 4 x − 5 )

When adding or subtracting rational expressions with different denominators, the first
step is to find the LCD. Here is the general procedure.
Procedure for Adding or Subtracting Rational
Expressions with Different Denominators
Step 1

Find the LCD.

Step 2

A
AC
, write each rational expression as a rational expression
=
B
BC
with the LCD as the denominator.
Following the order of operations, add or subtract numerators, keeping the
LCD as the denominator.
Simplify.

Step 3
Step 4

Using

EXAMPLE 7

Using the LCD to Add and Subtract Rational Expressions

Add or subtract as indicated. Simplify your answer and leave it in factored form.
3
x
,
a. 2
+ 2
x ≠ 1, x ≠ −1
x −1
x + 2x + 1
x+2
3x
,
x ≠ 0, x ≠ 1
b. 2
−
x −x
4 ( x − 1)2

Solution
a. Step 1

Step 2

Note that x 2 − 1 = ( x − 1 )( x + 1 ) and x 2 + 2 x + 1 = ( x + 1 ) 2 ; the
LCD is ( x + 1 ) 2 ( x − 1 ).
Multiply numerator
3
3
3( x + 1 )
=
=
and
denominator by
( x − 1 )( x + 1 )
( x − 1 )( x + 1 ) 2
x2 − 1
x + 1.
x ( x − 1)
x
x
=
2 =
2
(
)
(
x + 2x + 1
x+1
x + 1)2 ( x − 1)

Multiply numerator
and denominator by
x − 1.

Section P.5 Rational Expressions

55

Steps 3–4 Add.
x
3( x + 1 )
x ( x − 1)
3
+ 2
=
+
( x − 1 )( x + 1 ) 2
( x − 1 )( x + 1 ) 2
x2 − 1
x + 2x + 1
=
=
b. Step 1

3( x + 1 ) + x ( x − 1 )
3x + 3 + x 2 − x
=
( x − 1 )( x + 1 ) 2
( x − 1 )( x + 1 ) 2
x 2 + 2x + 3

( x − 1 )( x + 1 ) 2

The LCD is 4 x ( x − 1 ) 2 .

x 2 − x = x ( x − 1)

Step 2
( x + 2 ) ⋅ 4 ( x − 1)
4 ( x + 2 )( x − 1 )
x+2
x+2
=
=
=
2
(
)
(
)
4 x ( x − 1)2
x −x
x x −1
x ( x − 1) ⋅ 4 x − 1

Multiply
numerator and
denominator
by 4 ( x − 1 ).

( 3x ) x
3x
3x 2
=
2 =
2
4 ( x − 1)
4 ( x − 1) x
4 x ( x − 1)2

Multiply
numerator and
denominator
by x.

Steps 3–4 Subtract.
3x
x+2
4 ( x + 2 )( x − 1 )
3x 2
4 ( x + 2 )( x − 1 ) − 3 x 2
−
−
2 =
2
2 =
2
x −x
4 ( x − 1)
4 x ( x − 1)
4 x ( x − 1)
4 x ( x − 1)2
=

x 2 + 4x − 8
4 x 2 + 4 x − 8 − 3x 2
=
2
(
)
4x x − 1
4 x ( x − 1)2

Practice Problem 7. Add or subtract as indicated. Simplify your answers.
4
x
+ 2
,
x ≠ 2, x = −2
a. 2
x − 4x + 4
x −4
b.

Objective 5

2x
3( x − 5 ) 2

−

6x
2( x 2 − 5x )

,

x ≠ 0, x ≠ 5 

Complex Fractions
A rational expression that contains another rational expression in its numerator or denominator (or both) is called a complex rational expression or complex fraction. To simplify
a complex fraction, we write it as a rational expression in lowest terms.
There are two effective methods of simplifying complex fractions.
Procedures for Simplifying Complex Fractions
Method 1 Perform the operations indicated in both the numerator and denominator
of the complex fraction. Then multiply the resulting numerator by the
reciprocal of the denominator.
Method 2 Multiply the numerator and the denominator of the complex fraction by
the LCD of all rational expressions that appear in either the numerator
or the denominator. Simplify the result.

56

Chapter P Basic Concepts of Algebra

EXAMPLE 8

Simplifying a Complex Fraction

1
1
+
2
x
, x ≠ 0, x ≠ 2, x ≠ −2, using each of the two methods.
Simplify 2
x −4
2x

Solution

Reciprocal of the denominator

Method 1

1
1
x+2
+
2
2x
x
x+2
2x
x+2
2x
= 2
=
⋅ 2
=
⋅
2x
x −4
2x
( x + 2)( x − 2)
x −4
x2 − 4
2x
2x
( x + 2 ) ( 2x )
1
=
=
( 2 x ) ( x + 2 ) ( x − 2)
x−2

1 1
x2 − 4
Method 2 The LCD of , , and
is 2x.
2 x
2x
1
1
+
2
x
=
2
x −4
2x

( 12 + 1x ) 2x
( x 2−x 4 ) 2x
2

(

)

(

)

Multiply numerator and
denominator by the LCD.

1( ) 1( )
2x +
2x
x+2
2
x
x+2
1
=
= 2
=
=
2
(
)
(
)
x −4
x−2 x+2
x−2
 ( x − 4)  ( 2 x )


2x


5
1
+
3x
3
, x ≠ 0, x ≠ 5, x ≠ −5.
Practice Problem 8. Simplify: 2
x − 25
3x
EXAMPLE 9

Simplifying a Complex Fraction
x

Simplify:

, x ≠

7

2x −

3−

7
.
5

1
2

Solution
We use Method 1.

Reciprocal of the denominator

2
14
7
.
=
= 7⋅ =
1
5
5
5
3−
2
2
x
x
Then
=
7
14
2x −
2x −
1
5
3−
2
Begin with

7

Replace 3 −

Replace

1
5
with .
2
2

7
1
3−
2

with

14
.
5

Reciprocal of the denominator

5
x
5x
5x
.
= x⋅
=
=
10 x − 14
10 x − 14
10 x − 14
2( 5x − 7 )
5
5x
4
Practice Problem 9. Simplify:
, x ≠ .
4
5
3x −
1
2−
3
=

Section P.5 Rational Expressions

P.5

57

Exercises

Concepts and Vocabulary
1. The least common denominator of two rational
expressions is the polynomial of least degree that contains
as a factor.
2. The first step in finding the LCD of two rational expressions
is to
the denominators completely.
3. If the denominators of two rational expressions are x 2 − 2 x
and x 2 − x − 2, the LCD is

.

4. A rational expression that contains another rational
expression in its numerator or denominator is called a(n)
.
1
1
5. True or False. The expression + is a complex
2
x
fraction.
6. True or False. A polynomial is also a rational expression.
7. True or False. In simplifying rational expressions to lowest
a +b
b
= .
terms, we use
a +c
c
2 x 2 + 3x
8. True or False. The fraction
is in lowest
x+1
terms.

29.
30.

11.

3x + 3
x2 − 1

12.

10 − 5 x
4 − x2

13.

2x − 6
9 − x2

14.

15 + 3 x
x 2 − 25

15.

2x − 1
1 − 2x

16.

2 − 5x
5x − 2

17.

x 2 − 6x + 9
4 x − 12

18.

x 2 − 10 x + 25
3 x − 15

7x 2 + 7x
+ 2x + 1

20.

21.

x 2 − 11x + 10
x 2 + 6x − 7

22.

23.

6 x 4 + 14 x 3 + 4 x 2
6 x 4 − 10 x 3 − 4 x 2

24.

19.

x2

2x + 6 x 2 + x − 6
⋅
4x − 8
x2 − 9

28.

⋅

5 x − 15
x+3

x2 − x − 6 x2 − 1
⋅
x 2 + 3x + 2 x 2 − 9

32.

x 2 + 2x − 8
x 2 − 16
⋅ 2
2
x + x − 20 x + 5 x + 4

33.

2 − x x 2 + 3x + 2
⋅
x+1
x2 − 4

34.

3 − x x 2 + 8 x + 15
⋅
x+5
x2 − 9

35.

x+2
4x + 8
÷
6
9

36.

x+3
4 x + 12
÷
20
9

37.

x2 − 9
2x + 6
÷
x
5x 2

38.

x2 − 1
7x − 7
÷ 2
3x
x + x

39.

x 2 + 2x − 3
x −1
÷
x 2 + 8 x + 16
3 x + 12

40.

x 2 + 5x + 6
x 2 + 3x + 2
÷ 2
2
x + 6x + 9
x + 7 x + 12

( xx −+ 98 ÷ x + 2xx +−3 x − 2 ) x 1− 1
x − 25
x + 3 x − 10 x − 2
42. (
÷
) x−5
x − 3x − 4
x −1
41.

2
3

3

2

2

2

2

2

2

In Exercises 43–60, add and subtract as indicated. Simplify
and leave the numerator and denominator in your answer in
factored form. Exercises 57–60 require an LCD.
x
3
7
x
43. +
44. −
5
5
4
4
45.

46.

4 x 2 + 12 x
x 2 + 6x + 9

x
4
+
2x + 1
2x + 1

2x
x
+
7x − 3
7x − 3

47.

48.

x 2 + 2 x − 15
x 2 − 7 x + 12

x2
x2 − 1
−
x+1
x+1

2x + 7
x−2
−
3x + 2
3x + 2

49.

4
2x
+
3−x
x−3

50.

−2
2−x
+
1− x
x −1

51.

5x
2x
+ 2
x2 + 1
x +1

52.

x
3x
+
2( x − 1) 2
2( x − 1) 2

53.

7x
x
+
2( x − 3 )
2( x − 3 )

54.

4x
8x
+
4( x + 5 )2
4( x + 5 )2

55.

x
2
− 2
x2 − 4
x −4

56.

5x
5
− 2
x2 − 1
x −1

57.

x−2
x
−
2x + 1 2x − 1

58.

2x − 1
2x
−
4x + 1 4x − 1

3x 4

3x 3 + x 2
− 11x 3 − 4 x 2

In Exercises 25–42, multiply or divide as indicated. Simplify
and leave the numerator and denominator in your answer in
factored form. Assume all denominators are nonzero.
x − 3 10 x + 20
6x + 4 x − 4
25.
⋅
26.
⋅
2 x + 4 5 x − 15
2x − 8 9x + 6
27.

x2 − 9
x 2 − 6x + 9

31.

Building Skills
In Exercises 9–24, reduce each rational expression to lowest
terms. Specify the domain of the rational expression by
identifying all real numbers that must be excluded from the
domain.
2x + 2
3x − 6
9. 2
10. 2
x + 2x + 1
x − 4x + 4

x 2 − 7x
x2 − 1
⋅
x 2 − 6x − 7
x2

25 x 2 − 9 4 − x 2
⋅
4 − 2x
10 x − 6

58

Chapter P Basic Concepts of Algebra

59.

x−2
x
−x
+
−
x+2
x
x−2

60.

3x
x+1
2x
+
−
x −1
x
x+1

In Exercises 85–98, perform the indicated operations and
simplify the result. Leave the numerator and denominator in
your answer in factored form.
85.

In Exercises 61–68, find the LCD for each pair of rational
expressions.
5
2x
5x + 1 1 − x
61.
,
62.
,
3x − 6 4 x − 8
7 + 21x 3 + 9 x

14 x
2x + 7
64.
,
( 3x − 1) 2 9 x 2 − 1

66.
67.
68.

1− x
3 x + 12
,
x 2 + 3x + 2 x 2 − 1
5x + 9
x2 − x − 6

,

x+5
x2 − 9

7 − 4x
x2 − x
,
x 2 − 5x + 4 x 2 + x − 2

In Exercises 69–84, perform the indicated operations and
simplify the result. Leave the numerator and denominator in
your answer in factored form.

88.

1
x

1
−x
x
91.
1
1− 2
x

x−
92.

x
1
x+
2

1
1
−
x+h
x
95.
h

96.

1
−1
x2
x
x+

1
2

1

−

( x + h )2

1
x2

h

1
1
+
x−a
x+a
98.
x
a
−
x−a
x+a

70.

3x
x
+ 2
x −1
x −1

71.

2x
x
−
x2 − 4
x+2

72.

3x − 1
2x + 1
−
x 2 − 16
x−4

Applying the Concepts

73.

x−2
x+3
+ 2
x 2 + 3 x − 10
x + x−6

74.

x+3
x −1
+ 2
x2 − x − 2
x + 2x + 1

75.

2x − 3
4x − 1
+
9 x 2 − 1 ( 3x − 1) 2
+

1
x

94. x +

5
2x
+ 2
x−3
x −9

3x + 1

1
−1
x2

2
x
90.
2
1+
x

69.

( 2 x + 1)2

1
x2

2−

1
1
+
x−a
x+a
97.
1
1
−
x−a
x+a

76.

−6
x
2
x3

1
−1
x
89.
1
+1
x

93. x −

13 x
2x 2 − 4
,
x 2 − 2 x − 3 x 2 + 3x + 2

86.

1
x
1−

3−x
7x
63.
,
4 x 2 − 1 ( 2 x + 1) 2

65.

87.

2
x
3
x2

99. Bearing length. The length (in centimeters) of a bearing
125.6
, where r is the
in the shape of a cylinder is given by
πr 2
radius of the base of the cylinder. Find the length of a bearing with a diameter of 4 centimeters, using 3.14 as an
approximation of π.
100. Toy box height. The height (in feet) of an open toy box
13.5 − 2 x 2
that is twice as long as it is wide is given by
,
6x
where x is the width of the box. Find the height of a toy box

x+3
4x 2 − 1

that is 1.5 feet wide.

77.

x−3
x−3
− 2
x 2 − 25
x + 9 x + 20

78.

2x
2x − 7
− 2
x 2 − 16
x − 7 x + 12

79.

3
1
1
+
−
x2 − 4
2−x
2+ x

80.

2
5
7
+ 2
+
5+ x
x − 25
5−x

81.

x + 3a
x + 5a
−
x − 5a
x − 3a

82.

83.

1
1
−
x+h
x

84.

101. Diluting a mixture. A 100-gallon mixture of citrus extract
and water is 3% citrus extract.
a. Write a rational expression in x whose values give the
percentage (in decimal form) of the mixture that is citrus
extract when x gallons of water are added to the mixture.
b. Find the percentage of citrus extract in the mixture assuming that 50 gallons of water are added to it.

3x − a
2x + a
−
2x − a
3x + a
1
( x + h )2

−

1
x2

102. Acidity in a reservoir. A half-full 400,000-gallon reservoir
is found to be 0.75% acid.
a. Write a rational expression in x whose values give the
percentage (in decimal form) of acid in the reservoir
when x gallons of water are added to it.
b. Find the percentage of acid in the reservoir assuming that
100,000 gallons of water are added to it.

Section P.5 Rational Expressions
103. Diet lemonade. A company packages its powdered diet
lemonade mix in containers in the shape of a cylinder. The
top and bottom are made of a tin product that costs 5 cents
per square inch. The side of the container is made of a
cheaper material that costs 1 cent per square inch. The
height of any cylinder can be found by dividing its volume
by the area of its base.
a. Assuming that x is the radius of the base (in inches),
write a rational expression in x whose values give the
cost of each container, assuming that the capacity of the
container is 120 cubic inches.
b. Find the cost of a container whose base is 4 inches in
diameter, using 3.14 as an approximation of π.
x

		where x is the percent (in decimal) of the student population
that uses drugs. In a student population among which only
5% of the students use drugs, find the likelihood that a student who tests positive is a nonuser. Round to the nearest
(whole number) percent.
106. False positives. Rework the previous exercise for a student
population where 10% of the students use drugs.

Beyond the Basics
In Exercises 107–116, simplify each expression.
107.
108.

Volume 5 120 cubic inches

109.
110.
111.

104. Storage containers. A company makes storage containers
in the shape of an open box with a square base. All five
sides of the box are made of a plastic that costs 40 cents per
square foot. The height of any box can be found by dividing
its volume by the area of its base.
a. Assuming that x is the length of the base (in feet), write
a rational expression in x whose values give the cost of
each container, assuming that the capacity of the container is 2.25 cubic feet.
b. Find the cost of a container whose base is 1.5 feet
long.
105. False positives. With a test that is 98% accurate, an
expression for the likelihood that a student who tests positive for drugs is a nonuser is
0.02( 1 − x )
,
0.98 x + 0.02( 1 − x )

GETTING READY

59

112.

( 3x + 4 )2 − ( 2 x + 3 )2
( 3x + 4 )2

( x 2 + 1) − x ( 2 x )
( x 2 + 1)

2

( x 2 − 2 x + 1 )( 2 x + 2 ) − ( x 2 + 2 x + 1 )( 2 x − 2 )
( x 2 − 2 x + 1)

2

( 3 x 2 + 4 x + 1 )( 4 x + 1 ) − ( 2 x 2 + x − 1 )( 6 x + 4 )
( 3x 2 + 4 x + 1)

2

x 2 − x − 20 x 2 − x − 2
x+1
⋅ 2
÷ 2
x 2 − 25
x + 2x − 8
x + 5x
 y 2 x + x 3 y 4 + y 2 x 2 + x 4 
÷  3
⋅ 2

 y − x3
y x − yx 2 + x 3 

y4 − x4
y 2 − 2 xy + x 2
1

113.
a−

1
1
a+
a

1

−
a+

1
1
a

a−

x−y
x2 − y2
1+ 2
x+ y
x + y2
÷
114.
x−y
x2 − y2
1−
1− 2
x+ y
x + y2
1+

115.

( 1 −x x + 1 2−x x ) ÷ x x+ 1
2

4

4

2

8

x2 + y2
−x
y
x2 − y2
116.
⋅ 3
1
1
x + y3
−
y
x

for the Next Section

REVIEW CONCEPTS

REVIEW SKILLS

Absolute value (Section P.1, page 9)

Simplifying expressions (Section P.1, page 11, Section P.2,
page 24)
In Exercises GR1–GR6, state whether the statement is True
or False.
GR1. 2a + 5a = ( 2 + 5 ) a = 7a

Integer exponents (Section P.2, page 20)
Special-product formulas (Section P.3, page 36)
Properties of fractions (Section P.1, page 13)

GR2. xd + yd − zd = ( x + y − z ) d
GR3. ( −a ) 2 = −a 2
2

GR5. ( −3b ) = 9b 2

GR4. ( 2a ) 2 = 2a 2
GR6. ( a + b ) 2 = a 2 + b 2

60

Chapter P Basic Concepts of Algebra

P.6

Rational Exponents and Radicals
Objectives

Videos for
this Section

1

Define and evaluate square roots.

2

Simplify square roots.

3

Define and evaluate nth roots.

4

Combine like radicals.

5

Rationalize denominators or numerators.

6

Define and evaluate rational exponents.

Friction and Tap-Water Flow
Suppose your water company had a large
reservoir or water tower 80 meters or more
above the level of your cold-water faucet. If
there was no friction in the pipes and you
turned on your faucet, the water would come
pouring out of the faucet at nearly 90 miles
per hour! This fact follows from a result known
as Bernoulli’s equation, which predicts the
velocity of the water (ignoring friction and
related turbulence) in this situation to be
equal to 2 gh, where g is the acceleration
due to gravity and h is the height of the water
level above a hole from which the water
escapes.
In Example 3, we use Bernoulli’s equation
to find the velocity of water.

Objective 1

Square Roots
When we raise the number 5 to the power 2, we write 5 2 = 25. The reverse of this squaring process is called finding a square root. In the case of 25, we say that 5 is a square root
of 25 and write 25 = 5. In general, we say that b is a square root of a if b 2 = a. We
can’t call 5 the square root of 25 because it is also true that ( −5 ) 2 = 25, so that −5 is
another square root of 25.
The symbol , called a radical sign, is used to distinguish between 5 and −5, the two
square roots of 25. We write 5 = 25 and −5 = − 25 and call 25 the principal square
root of 25.
Principal Square Root
a = b means

(1)

b2 = a

b is called the principal square root of a.

and

( 2)

b ≥ 0.

Section P.6 Rational Exponents and Radicals

Radical

a
Radical sign

Radicand

61

If a = b, then a = b 2 ≥ 0. Consequently, the symbol a denotes a real number
only when a ≥ 0. The number or expression under the radical sign is called the radicand,
and the radicand together with the radical sign is called a radical.
Note that, for a ≥ 0 both a and − a are square roots of a.
Square Root Property
For a ≥ 0, if x 2 = a then x = ± a.
According to the definition of the square root, the number b must pass two tests for the
statement a = b to be correct: (1) b 2 = a and (2) b ≥ 0. These tests are used to decide
whether the statements below are true or false.
Statement

Test (1)

a = b

b 2 = a?

Either x = x or x = − x .
Then x 2 = x ⋅ x = x ⋅ x = x 2
or x 2 = x ⋅ x = ( −x ) ⋅ ( −x )
= x 2 so x 2 = x 2 .

Conclusion True when b
passes both tests

4 = 2

22 = 4 ✓

2 ≥ 0✓

True: 2 passed both tests.

4 = −2

( −2 ) 2

−2 ≥ 0 ✗

False: −2 failed Test (2).

= 4✓

= 13

( 13 ) = 19 ✓

1
3

≥ 0✓

True: 13 passed both tests.

72 = 7

72 = 72 ✓

7 ≥ 0✓

True: 7 passed both tests.

( −7 ) 2

( −7 ) 2

−7 ≥ 0 ✗

False: −7 failed Test (2).

1
9

SIDE NOTE

Test (2)

b ≥ 0?

2

= −7

= ( −7 ) 2 ✓

The last example (letting x represent −7) shows that x 2 is not always equal to x. Now
apply Test (1) and Test (2) to the statement x 2 = x , where x represents any real number.
Statement
x2 = x

Test (1)
x 2 = x2 ✓

Test (2)
x ≥ 0✓

Conclusion
True; x passed both tests.

For any real number x,
x2 = x .
If x = b, then by Test (1), b 2 = x and by Test (2), b is nonnegative. Replacing b
with x in the equation b 2 = x yields the following result.
TECHNOLOGY CONNECTION
You must enclose a rational
number in parentheses before
taking its square root and then
use the “Frac” feature to have
the answer appear as a fraction.

For any nonnegative real number x,
2

( x ) = x.
EXAMPLE 1

Finding the Square Roots of Perfect Squares and Their Ratios

Find.
a.

121

b.

25
81

c.

16
169

b.

25
=
81

Solution
Write each radicand as a perfect square.
a.

121 =

11 2 = 11

52
=
92

( 95 ) = 95
2

62

Chapter P Basic Concepts of Algebra

c.

16
=
169

( 134 ) = 134
2

42
=
13 2

Practice Problem 1. Find.
a.

Objective 2

144

b.

1
49

4
	
64

c.

Simplifying Square Roots
When working with square roots, we can simplify a radical expression by removing from
under the radical sign perfect squares that are factors of the radicand. For example, to
simplify 8, we write 8 = 4 ⋅ 2 = 4 2 = 2 2 . We rely on the following rules.
Product and Quotient Properties of Square Roots
ab =

a

a
=
b

a
b

a ≥ 0, b ≥ 0

b

a ≥ 0, b > 0

When simplifying square roots using the product and quotient properties of square roots,
check to make sure that the resulting radicand does not have any square factors (aside
from 1). For example, 72 = 2 18, but 18 can be simplified further.
EXAMPLE 2

Simplifying Square Roots

Simplify: a.

117.   b.

d.

36
.   e.
3

6

12.   c.

48 x 2 .

25 y 3
, x ≠ 0, y ≥ 0.
9x 2

Solution
a.

117 =

9 ⋅ 13 =

b.

6 12 =

6 ⋅ 12 =

6⋅6⋅2 =

c.

48 x 2 =

48 x 2 =

16 ⋅ 3

d.

36
=
3

e.

25 y 3
=
9x 2

36
=
3

9 13 = 3 13

12 =

25 y 3
=
9x 2

62 ⋅ 2 =

x2 =

4⋅3 =

16

62 2 = 6 2

3 x2 = 4 3 x

4 3 = 2 3

25 ⋅ y 2 ⋅ y
=
9 ⋅ x2

25

5 y y
y2 y
=
2
3 x
9 x
5y y
=
3 x

x ≠ 0, y ≥ 0
y = y

Practice Problem 2. Simplify.
a.

WARNING

20   b.

6 8   c.

12 x 2    d.

20 y 3
, x ≠ 0, y ≥ 0
27 x 2

It is important to note that a + b ≠ a + b. For example, with a = 1 and b = 4,
1 + 4 ≠ 1 + 4 because 1 + 4 = 5 , whereas 1 + 4 = 1 + 2 = 3 and 5 ≠ 3.
Similarly, a − b ≠ a − b.

Section P.6 Rational Exponents and Radicals

EXAMPLE 3

63

Calculating Water Flow from a Punctured Water Tower

From the introduction to this section, verify the claim that the water would come pouring
out of the faucet at nearly 90 miles per hour.

Solution
We can use Bernoulli’s equation to find the velocity of the water from the faucet. If
we ignore friction, the velocity of water will be 2 gh , where g is the acceleration due to
gravity and h is the height of the water level above the faucet.
We replace h with 80 meters and roughly approximate g by 10 meters per second per
second ( g ≈ 10 m/s 2 ) in the expression 2 gh .
Thus, the velocity of the water is
=

2 gh

≈

2(10 m/s 2 )(80 m) =

1600 m 2 /s 2 = 40 meters per second

= 40 × 60 × 60 meters per hour

60 × 60 seconds each hour

= 144 × 1000 meters per hour
≈ 144 × 0.6214 mph

1000 m ≈ 0.6214 miles

= 89.4816 mph
≈ 90 miles per hour.
Practice Problem 3. Repeat Example 3 if the water tower is 45 meters high.

Objective 3

Other Roots
If n is a positive integer, we say that b is an nth root of a if b n = a. We next define the
principal nth root of a real number a, denoted by the symbol n a .
The Principal nth Root of a Real Number
1.
2.
3.
4.

Index

n
Radical sign

a
Radicand

If a is positive ( a > 0 ), then n a = b provided that b n = a and b > 0.
If a is negative ( a < 0 ) and n is odd, then n a = b provided that b n = a.
If a is negative ( a < 0 ) and n is even, then n a is not a real number.
If a = 0, then n a = 0.

We use the same vocabulary for nth roots that we used for square roots. That is, n a is
called a radical expression,
is the radical sign, and a is the radicand. The positive
integer n is called the index. The index 2 is not written; we write a rather than 2 a for the
principal square root of a. It is also common practice to call 3 a the cube root of a.
EXAMPLE 4

Finding Principal nth Roots

Find each root. a. 3 27     b. 3 −64     c. 4 16     d. 4 ( −3 ) 4     a. 8 −46

Solution
a. The radicand, 27, is positive; so 3 27 = 3 because 3 3 = 27 and 3 > 0.
b. The radicand, −64, is negative and 3 is odd; so 3 −64 = −4 because
( − 4 ) 3 = − 64.
c. The radicand, 16, is positive; so 4 16 = 2 because 2 4 = 16 and 2 > 0.
d. The radicand, ( −3 ) 4 , is positive; so 4 ( −3 ) 4 = 3 because 3 4 = ( −3 ) 4 and 3 > 0.
e. The radicand, −46, is negative and the index, 8, is even; so 8 −46 is not a real number.

64

Chapter P Basic Concepts of Algebra

Practice Problem 4. Find each root.
a.

3

−8   b. 5 32   c. 4 81  d. 6 −4 

The fact that the definition of the principal nth root depends on whether n is even or
odd results in two rules to replace the square root rule x 2 = x .
Simplifying n a n
If n is odd, then n a n = a.
If n is even, then n a n = a .
The product and quotient rules for square roots can be extended to apply to nth roots as well.
Rules for Radicals
If a and b are real numbers and all indicated roots are defined, then
n

ab = n a ⋅ n b ,
n a

b

m n

and

n

= n

Product rule

a
,
b

Quotient rule

a = mn a .

Power rule

Simplifying nth Roots

EXAMPLE 5

Simplify. a. 3 135  b. 4 162a 4   c. 3

5
4
  d. 3 7
64

Solution
a. We find a factor of 135 that is a perfect cube. Here 135 = 27 ⋅ 5 and 27 is a perfect
cube ( 3 3 = 27 ). Then
3

135 = 3 27 ⋅ 5 = 3 27 3 5 = 3 3 5.

b. We find a factor of 162 that is a perfect fourth power. Here 162 = 81 ⋅ 2 and 81 is a
perfect fourth power: 3 4 = 81. Thus,
4

c.

d.

3

162a 4 = 4 162 4 a 4 = 4 81 ⋅ 2 a = 4 81 4 2 a = 3 4 2 a .

3
5
5
= 3
64
64
3
5
=
4

4 3

7 = 4 ⋅3 7
=

12

Quotient rule
64 = 4 3 , so 3 64 = 4
Power rule

7

Practice Problem 5. Simplify.
a.

Objective 4

3

72    b. 4 48a 2    c.

3

64 

Like Radicals
Radicals that have the same index and the same radicand are called like radicals. Like
radicals can be combined with the use of the distributive property.

Section P.6 Rational Exponents and Radicals

EXAMPLE 6

Adding and Subtracting Radical Expressions

Simplify: a.

45 + 7 20.  b. 5 3 80 x − 3 3 270 x .

65

Solution
a. We find perfect-square factors for both 45 and 20.
45 + 7 20 =

9⋅5+7 4⋅5

45 = 9 ⋅ 5; 20 = 4 ⋅ 5

=

9 5+7 4 5

Product rule

= 3 5+7⋅2 5

9 = 3;

4 = 2

= 3 5 + 14 5

Like radicals

= ( 3 + 14 ) 5

Distributive property

= 17 5
b. This time we find perfect-cube factors for both 80 and 270.
5 3 80 x − 3 3 270 x = 5 3 8 ⋅ 10 x − 3 3 27 ⋅ 10 x
3

3

3

3

80 = 8 ⋅ 10; 270 = 27 ⋅ 10

= 5 8 ⋅ 10 x − 3 27 ⋅ 10 x

Product rule

= 5 ⋅ 2 ⋅ 3 10 x − 3 ⋅ 3 3 10 x

3

= 10 3 10 x − 9 3 10 x

Like radicals

3

= ( 10 − 9 ) 10 x

8 = 2; 3 27 = 3

Distributive property

= 3 10 x
Practice Problem 6. Simplify.
a. 3 12 + 7 3  b. 2 3 135 x − 3 3 40 x 
WARNING

In general:
n

an + bn ≠ a + b

n

a+b ≠ na+ nb

n

a + n b cannot be added if a ≠ b.

n

a + n a = 2n a

n

a + m a cannot be added if n ≠ m.

Radicals with Different Indexes
Suppose a is a positive real number and m, n, and r are positive integers. Then the property
n

a m = nr a mr

is used to multiply radicals with different indexes.
EXAMPLE 7

Multiplying Radicals with Different Indexes

a. Write 2 3 5 as a single radical.
b. Write 4 x 3 , 3 y 2 , and 6 z 5 as radicals with the same lowest index.

Solution
a. Because 2 can also be written as 2 2, we have
2 = 2 2 = 2 ⋅3 2 3 = 6 2 3 ,
and similarly,
3
5 = 2 ⋅3 5 2 = 6 5 2 .
So
2 3 5 = 6 2 3 6 5 2 = 6 2 3 5 2 = 6 200. n a ⋅ n b = n ab

66

Chapter P Basic Concepts of Algebra

b. To express each of the three radicals with the same index of lowest order, we choose
the least common multiple of the three indexes. Here, the least common multiple of 4,
3, and 6 is 12. We express each radical with index 12. We have
4

x 3 = 4 ⋅3 x 3 ⋅3 = 12 x 9 ,

3

y 2 = 3 ⋅ 4 y 2 ⋅ 4 = 12 y 8 ,

6

z 5 = 6 ⋅ 2 z 5 ⋅ 2 = 12 z 10 .

Practice Problem 7. a. Write 3 5 2 as a single radical.
b. Write 6 x 5 and 8 y 7 with the same lowest index. 

Objective 5

Rationalizing Radical Expressions
Removing radicals in the denominator or the numerator is called rationalizing the
denominator or rationalizing the numerator, respectively. The procedure for rationalizing involves multiplying the fraction by 1, written in a special way, so as to obtain a
perfect nth power.
EXAMPLE 8

Rationalizing the Denominator

Rationalize each denominator.
3
5
4
    b. 3
2
9

a.

Solution
5
=
2

a.
b.

5
⋅
2

2
=
2

10
=
4

10
2

3

3
3
3
4
4 33
12
12
=
⋅
=
=
3
3
3
3
3
9
9
3
27

Practice Problem 8. Rationalize each denominator.
a.

3
7
3
    b. 3 
4
8

Conjugates
Pairs of expressions of the form a x + b y and a x − b y are called conjugates. We
form the product of these two conjugates.
2

( a x + b y )( a x − b y ) = ( a x ) − ( b y )
= a 2x − b 2y

2

Difference of two squares
( ac ) 2

2

= a 2c 2 ; ( z ) = z

We see that the product contains no radicals. So the product of conjugates can be used to
rationalize the denominator or the numerator.
EXAMPLE 9

Rationalizing the Numerator

Rationalize each numerator.
a.

5−
4

2

    b.

x + 3
x2 − 9

Section P.6 Rational Exponents and Radicals

67

Solution
a.

5−
4

2

5−
4

=

2

5+
5+

⋅

2

b.

2
2

2

=

( 5) − ( 2)
4( 5 + 2 )

=

5−2
3
=
4( 5 + 2 )
4( 5 +

( a − b )( a + b ) = a 2 − b 2

x + 3
x− 3
⋅
x2 − 9
x− 3
x−3
=
( x 2 − 9 )( x − 3 )

2)

x + 3
=
x2 − 9

( x + 3 )( x − 3 ) = x − 3

x−3

=

( x − 3 )( x + 3 )(

1

=

( x + 3 )(

x−

3)

x−
3)

Factor: x 2 − 9 = ( x − 3 )( x + 3 ).

Remove common factor.

Practice Problem 9. Rationalize each denominator.
x−2
2
a.
    b.

x + 2
7− 5

Objective 6

Rational Exponents
Previously, we defined such exponential expressions as 2 3 , but what do you think 2 1/ 3
means? If we want to preserve the power rule of exponents, ( a n ) m = a n ⋅ m , for rational
1
exponents such as , we must have
3
3
( 2 1/ 3 ) = 2 (1/ 3 ) ⋅ 3 = 2 1 = 2.
3

Because ( 2 1/ 3 ) = 2, it follows that 2 1/ 3 is the cube root of 2, that is, 2 1/ 3 = 3 2.
Such considerations lead to the following definition.
The Exponent

1
n

For any real number a and any integer n > 1,
a 1/ n = n a.
When n is even and a < 0, n a and a 1/ n are not real numbers.
Notice that the denominator n of the rational exponent is the index of the radical.

EXAMPLE 10

a. 16 1/ 2.  b. ( −27 )1/ 3 .  c.

Evaluate:

Solution
a. 16 1/ 2 =
b. ( −27 )

1/ 4

( 161 )

1/ 4

( 161 ) .  d. 32 .  e. ( −5 ) .
1/ 5

1/ 4

16 = 4

1/ 3

c.

Evaluating Expressions with Rational Exponents

= 3 −27 = 3 ( −3 )3 = −3

= 4

( )

1
1 4
1
= 4
=
16
2
2

d. 32 1/ 5 = 5 32 = 5 2 5 = 2
e. Because the base −5 is negative and n = 4 is even, ( −5 )1/ 4 is not a real number.

68

Chapter P Basic Concepts of Algebra

Practice Problem 10. Evaluate.
1/ 2
a. 1
   b. ( 125 )1/ 3   c. ( −32 )1/ 5 
4

( )

The box below shows a summary of our work.

The Exponent

1
and Radicals
n

If a is any real number and n is any integer greater than 1, then
n even

n odd

If a > 0,

n

a = a

is positive.

n

a = a 1/ n is positive.

If a < 0,

n

a = a 1/ n is not a real number.

n

a = a 1/ n is negative.

If a = 0,

n

0 = 0 1/ n = 0.

n

0 = 0 1/ n = 0.

1/ n

We have defined the expression a 1/ n . How do we define a m / n , where m and n are integers?
If we insist that the power-of-a-product rule of exponents holds for rational numbers, then
we must have
m
m
a m / n = a (1/ n) ⋅ m = ( a 1/ n ) = ( n a )
and
a m / n = a m ⋅(1/ n) = ( a m )1/ n = n a m .
From this, we arrive at the following definition.
Rational Exponents
a m/ n = ( n a )

m

= n am,

provided that m and n are integers with no common factors, n > 1, and n a is a real
number.

m
is the exponent of the radical expresn
m
sion and the denominator n is the index of the radical in ( n a ) . When n is even and
a < 0, the symbol a m / n is not a real number.
3
−2
When rational exponents with negative denominators such as
and
are encoun−5
−7
−3
2
tered, we use equivalent expressions such as
and , respectively, before applying the
5
7
m
definition. Similarly, we reduce the exponent to its lowest terms before applying the
n
2
definition. Note that ( −8 ) 2 / 6 ≠ [ ( −8 )1/ 6 ] because ( −8 )1/ 6 = 6 −8 is not a real num2
1
ber but ( −8 ) 2 / 6 is a real number. Writing = , we have
6
3
Note that for a m / n the numerator m of the exponent

( −8 ) 2 / 6

EXAMPLE 11

= ( −8 )1/ 3 = 3 −8 = −2.

Evaluating Expressions Having Rational Exponents

Evaluate: a. 8 2 / 3.    b. −16 5 / 2.    c. 100 −3 / 2 .    d. ( −25 ) 7 / 2 .

Section P.6 Rational Exponents and Radicals

69

Solution
2

a. 8 2 / 3 = ( 3 8 ) = 2 2 = 4
5

b. −16 5 / 2 = −( 16 ) = −4 5 = −1024
−3

−3

= ( 100 )

c. 100 −3 / 2 = ( 100 1/ 2 )

d. ( −25 ) 7 / 2 = [ ( −25 )1/ 2 ]
= ( −25 )

7

=

1

( 100 )

3

=

1
1
=
10 3
1000

Not a real number because

7

−25 is not a real number

Practice Problem 11. Evaluate.
a. ( 25 ) 2 / 3   b. −36 3 / 2   c. 16 −5 / 2   d. ( −36 )−1/ 2 
All of the properties of exponents we learned for integer exponents hold true for rational exponents. For convenience, we list these properties next.

Properties of Rational Exponents
If r and s are rational numbers and a and b are real numbers, then
a r ⋅ a s = a r+s

(ar )

( ab ) = ab
r

ar
= a r −s
as

s

r
r

( ab ) r

= a rs
a −r =

1
ar

= arbr

( ab )

−r

=

( ba )

r

provided that all of the expressions used are defined.

EXAMPLE 12

Simplifying Expressions Having Rational Exponents

Simplify. Express the answer with only positive exponents. Assume that x represents a
positive real number.
−1/ 6
21x −2 / 3
a. 2 x 1/ 3 ⋅ 5 x 1/ 4    b.
   c. ( x 3 / 5 )
7 x 1/ 5

Solution
a. 2 x 1/ 3 ⋅ 5 x 1/ 4 = 2 ⋅ 5 x 1/ 3 ⋅ x 1/ 4

Group factors with the same base.

= 10 x 1/ 3 + 1/ 4
= 10 x 4 /12 + 3 /12
b.

( )( xx )

21
21x −2 / 3
=
7 x 1/ 5
7

−2 / 3
1/ 5

= 10 x 7 /12

Add exponents of factors with the
same base.

Group factors with the same base.

= 3 x −2 / 3 − 1/ 5 = 3 x −10 /15 − 3 /15 = 3 x −13 /15 = 3 ⋅
−1/ 6

c. ( x 3 / 5 )

= x ( 3 / 5 )( −1/ 6 ) = x −1/10 =

(x 1 ) = x 3
13 /15

13 /15

1
x 1/10

Practice Problem 12. Simplify. Express your answer with only positive exponents.
a. 4 x 1/ 2 ⋅ 3 x 1/ 5    b.

− 1/ 5
25 x −1/ 4
, x > 0    c. ( x 2 / 3 )
,x ≠ 0
1/ 3
5x

70

Chapter P Basic Concepts of Algebra

EXAMPLE 13

Simplifying Radicals by Using Rational Exponents

Assume that x represents a positive real number. Simplify.
a.

8

x 2    b. 4 9 3   c.

3

x8

Solution
a. 8 x 2 = ( x 2 )1/8 = x 2 /8 = x 1/ 4 = 4 x
b.

4

c.

9 3 = 9 1/ 4 ⋅ 31/ 2 = ( 3 2 )1/ 4 ⋅ 31/ 2 = 3 2 / 4 ⋅ 31/ 2 = 31/ 2 ⋅ 31/ 2 = 31/ 2 +1/ 2 = 31 = 3
3

x8 =

1/ 3

( x8 )

=

1/ 2

x 8/ 3 = ( x 8 / 3 )

= x 8/ 3 ⋅ 1/ 2 = x 4 / 3 =

x 1+1/ 3 = x 1 ⋅ x 1/ 3 = x 3 x
Practice Problem 13. Simplify.
a.

6

x 4    b. 4 25 5    c.

EXAMPLE 14

3

x 12 

Simplifying an Expression Involving Negative Rational Exponents

Simplify x ( x + 1 )−1/ 2 + 2( x + 1 )1/ 2 . Express the answer with only positive exponents
and then rationalize the denominator. Assume that ( x + 1 )−1/ 2 is defined.

Solution
x ( x + 1 )−1/ 2 + 2 ( x + 1 )1/ 2 =
=

1/ 2

2( x + 1)
x
+
1/ 2
1
( x + 1)

( x + 1 )−1/ 2 =

2 ( x + 1 )1/ 2 ( x + 1 )1/ 2
x
+
( x + 1 )1/ 2
( x + 1 )1/ 2

1
( x + 1 )1/ 2

a ab
=
b
1

2( x + 1)
x
+
( x + 1 )1/ 2 ( x + 1 )1/ 2 = x + 1
1/ 2
( x + 1)
( x + 1 )1/ 2
x + 2 ( x + 1)
3x + 2
Add fractions and simplify.
=
=
1/ 2
( x + 1)
( x + 1 )1/ 2
=

To rationalize the denominator ( x + 1 )1/ 2 =
denominator by ( x + 1 )1/ 2 .

x + 1, multiply both numerator and

( 3 x + 2 )( x + 1 )1/ 2
3x + 2
=
1/ 2
( x + 1 )1/ 2 ( x + 1 )1/ 2
( x + 1)

=

( 3 x + 2 )( x + 1 )1/ 2

x+1

( x + 1 )1/ 2 ( x + 1 )1/ 2

= x+1

Practice Problem 14. Simplify x ( x + 3 )−1/ 2 + ( x + 3 )1/ 2 .

P.6

Exercises

Concepts and Vocabulary
1. Any positive number has

square roots.

2. To rationalize the denominator of an expression with
denominator 2 5, multiply the
and
by

.

3. Radicals that have the same index and the same radicand are
called
.
4. The radical notation for 7 1/ 3 is

.

5. True or False. For all real x,

x 2 = x.

6. True or False. The radicals −3 5 and 12 5 are “like
radicals.”
m
1
n
7. True or False.
m = a
−
a n
−

1

8. True or False. 9 2 = −3

Section P.6 Rational Exponents and Radicals

Building Skills
In Exercises 9–24, evaluate each root or state that the root is
not a real number.

In Exercises 63–76, rationalize the denominator of each
expression.
63.

2
3

64.

10
5

65.

7
15

66.

−3
8

67.

1
2 + x

68.

69.

3
2− 3

70.

−5
1− 2

71.

1
3+

2

72.

6
5−

3

73.

2
2

74.

In Exercises 25–48, simplify each expression using the product and quotient properties for square roots. Assume that x
represents a positive real number.

5−
5+

7 +
7−

3
3

75.

x+h −
x+h +

25.

32

26.

125

76.

27.

18 x 2

28.

27 x 2

a x +3
a x −3

29.

9x 3

30.

8x 3

31.

6 x 3x

32.

5 x 10 x

33.

15 x 3 x 2

34.

2 x 2 18 x

9.
11.

10.

64
3

12.

64
1
8

18. − 4 ( −3 ) 2

19. 4 −16

20. 6 −64

5

22. 7 −1

21. − −1
23.

5

( −7 )

27
64

16. 3

( −3 ) 2

17.

125

14. 3 −216

13. 3 −27
15. 3 −

100
3

5

5

24. − ( −4 )

5

77.

4+h −2
h
y+9−3
y

36. 3 64 x 3

37. 3 −x 6

38. 3 −27 x 6

78.

x
x

39.

5
32

40.

3
50

79.

41. 3

8
x3

42. 3

7
8x 3

80.

43. 4

2
x5

44. − 4

5
16 x 5

x+2−
x

81.

x −2
x−4

45.

x8

46.

82.

47.

9x 6
y4

x − 5
x 2 − 25

83.

x 2 + 4x − x
2

84.

x 2 + 2x + 3 −
2

48. 5 x 15 y 5

In Exercises 49–62, simplify each expression. Assume that all
variables represent nonnegative real numbers.
49. 2 3 + 5 3
50. 7 2 −

2

51. 6 5 −

5+4 5

54.
55.

3

56.

3

2

x2 + 3

85. 251/ 2

86. 144 1/ 2

32 x

87. (−8) 1/ 3

88. ( −27 )1/ 3

45 x +

20 x

89. 8 2 / 3

90. 16 3/ 2

24 −

3

81

91. −25 −3/ 2

92. −9 −3/ 2

54 +

3

16

58. 3 16 x + 3 3 54 x − 3 2 x
2 x 5 − 5 32 x +

18 x 3

60. 2 50 x 5 + 7 2 x 3 − 3 72 x
61.

4−x
x

98 x −

57. 3 3 x − 2 3 24 x + 3 375 x
59.

2−

In Exercises 85–94, evaluate each expression without using a
calculator.

52. 5 7 + 3 7 − 2 7
53.

1
5 + 2x

In Exercises 77–84, rationalize the numerator of each
expression.

35. 3 −8 x 3

4x 4
25 y 6

71

48 x 5 y − 4 y 3 x 3 y + y 3 xy 3

62. x 8 xy + 4 2 xy 3 − 18 x 5 y

93.

( 259 )

−3 / 2

94.

−2 / 3

( 271 )

In Exercises 95–106, simplify each expression, leaving your
answer with only positive exponents. Assume that all variables represent positive numbers.
95. x 1/ 2 ⋅ x 2 / 5

96. x 3/ 5 ⋅ 5 x 2 / 3

97. x 3/ 5 ⋅ x −1/ 2

98. x 5/ 3 ⋅ x −3/ 4

72

Chapter P Basic Concepts of Algebra

99. ( 8 x 6 ) 2 / 3

100. ( 16 x 3 )1/ 2

101. ( 27 x 6 y 3 )−2 / 3

102. ( 16 x 4 y 6 )−3/ 2

103.

15 x 3/ 2
3 x 1/ 4

104.

 x −1/ 4 −12
105.  −2 / 3 
y


20 x 5/ 2
4 x 2/3

 27 x −5/ 2 −1/ 3
106. 
 y −3 

In Exercises 107–116, convert each radical expression to its
rational exponent form and then simplify. Assume that all
variables represent positive numbers.
107. 4 3 2

108. 4 5 2

109. 3 x 9

110. 3 x 12

111. 3 x 6 y 9

112. 3 8 x 3 y 12

113. 4 9 3

114. 4 49 7

3

115.

116.

x 10

3

135. Terminal speed. The terminal speed V of a steel ball that
weighs w grams and is falling in a cylinder of oil is given by
w
centimeters per second. Find the
the equation V =
1.5
terminal speed of a steel ball weighing 6 grams.
136. Model airplane speed. A spring balance scale attached
to a wire that holds a model airplane on a circular path
indicates the force F on the wire. The speed of the plane V ,
in m /sec, is given by V = (rF )/m , where m is the mass
of the plane (in kilograms) and r is the length of the wire
(in meters). What is the top speed of a 2-kilogram plane
on an 18-meter wire if the force on the wire at top speed is
49 newtons?

64 x 6

In Exercises 117–124, convert the given product to a single
radical with lowest index. Assume that all variables represent
positive numbers.
117. 3 2 ⋅ 5 3
118. 3 3 ⋅ 4 2
120. 5 x 2 ⋅ 7 x 5

119. 3 x 2 ⋅ 4 x 3
121.

9

2m 2 n ⋅

3

5m 5 n 2

123. 5 x 4 y 3 ⋅ 6 x 3 y 5

122.

3 xy ⋅ 3 9 x 2 y 2

124. 5 3a 4 b 2 ⋅ 6 7a 2 b 6

In Exercises 125–130, factor each expression. Use only positive
exponents in your answer.
4 1/ 3 (
x
2 x − 3 ) + 2 x 4 /3
3
4
126. x 1/ 3 ( 7 x + 1 ) + 7 x 4 / 3
3
127. 4 ( 3 x + 1 )1/ 3 ( 2 x − 1 ) + 2( 3 x + 1 ) 4 / 3
125.

128. 4 ( 3 x − 1 )1/ 3 ( x + 2 ) + ( 3 x − 1 ) 4 / 3
129. 3 x ( x 2 + 1 )1/ 2 ( 2 x 2 − x ) + 2( x 2 + 1 )3/ 2 ( 4 x − 1 )
130. 3 x ( x 2 + 2 )1/ 2 ( x 2 − 2 x ) + ( x 2 + 2 )3/ 2 ( 2 x − 2 )

Applying the Concepts
131. Sign dimensions. A sign in the shape of an equilateral
4A
centimeters.
triangle of area A has sides of length
3
Find the length of a side assuming that the sign has an
area of 692 square centimeters. (Use the approximation
3 ≈ 1.73.)
132. Return on investment. For an initial investment of
P dollars to mature to S dollars after two years when
the interest is compounded annually, an annual interest
S
rate of r =
− 1 is required. Find r assuming that
P
P = $1, 210,000 and S = $1, 411,344.
133. Fluid flow. A cylindrical container, filled with water, sits on
a garage counter. A small hole, 20 cm below the top of the
water surface, is punctured through the side of the cylinder
with a screwdriver. What is the speed of the fluid flowing
from the hole? Approximate g as 0.1 cm /s 2 .
134. Fluid flow. Rework the previous exercise if the small hole
is 15 cm below the top of the water surface. What is the
speed of the fluid flowing from the hole?

137. Electronic game current. The current I (in amperes) in a
circuit for an electronic game using W watts and having a
W
. Find the current
resistance of R ohms is given by I =
R
in a game circuit using 1058 watts and having a resistance
of 2 ohms.
138. Radius of the moon. The radius of a sphere having volume
3V 1/ 3
V is given by r =
. Assuming that we treat the
4π
moon as a sphere and are told that its volume is 2.19 × 10 19
cubic meters, find its radius. Use 3.14 as an approximation
for π.

( )

139. Atmospheric pressure. The atmospheric pressure P,
measured in pounds per square inch, at an altitude of h miles
( h < 50 ) is given by the equation P = 14.7 ( 0.5 ) h / 3.25 .
Compute the atmospheric pressure at an altitude of
16.25 miles.
140. Force from constrained water. The force F that is
exerted on the semicircular end of a trough full of water
is approximately F = 42r 3/ 2 pounds, where r is the radius
of the semicircular end. Find the force assuming that the
radius is 3 feet.

Beyond the Basics

1
1
1
−
+
−
3− 8
8− 7
7− 6
1
1
+
= 5.
6− 5
5−2
1
1
1
+
+
+
142. Show that
1+ 2
2 + 3
3+ 4
1
1
1
1
+
+
+
+
7 + 8
4 + 5
5+ 6
6 + 7
1
= 2.
8+ 9

141. Show that

Review and Tests
143. Let x = 2 + 3. Show that
1
1
a. x + = 4.  b. x 2 + 2 = 14.
x
x
1
144. Let x = 3 − 2 2. Show that x 2 + 2 = 34.
x
In Exercises 145–147, arrange the given numbers in increasing
order of magnitude without using a calculator.
145.

3, 8 70

5)

3+

152. Suppose a +

c =

a−

x −

c =

x +

y, show that

y .

153. Find x and y if x + y = 16 + 2 55. [Hint: Square
both sides to get x + y = a and xy = c.]

3, 3 7, 4 10

In Exercises 148–150, simplify each expression.
148. ( 2 3 + 3 2 )

5 )( 2 +

3−

151. Let a, b, x, and y be rational numbers and let c be an
irrational number.
a. Show that if a + b c = 0, then a = 0 or b = 0.
b. Use part (a) to show that if a + b c = x + y c, then
a = x and b = y.

5, 3 11, 6 123

146. 4 8,
147.

150. ( 2 +

2

154. Find 53 − 12 10 . [Hint: 53 − 12 10 =
53 − 2 360 = x − y .]

149. ( 3 5 + 4 3 )( 3 5 − 4 3 )

CHAPTER P REVIEW AND TESTS
Definitions, Concepts, and Formulas

Examples

P.1 The Real Numbers and Their Properties
i. Classifying numbers.
Natural numbers
N = {1, 2, 3, . . . }
W = { 0, 1, 2, 3, . . . }
Whole numbers
Integers
Z = { . . . , −2, −1, 0, 1, 2, . . . }
Rational numbers	Q: Numbers that can be expressed as
the quotient a of two integers, where
b
b ≠ 0; a terminating or repeating
decimal
Irrational numbers	
Decimals that neither terminate nor
repeat
Real numbers
R: All of the rational and irrational
numbers
ii.

Coordinate line. Real numbers can be associated with a geometric line called a number line or coordinate line. Numbers
associated with points to the right (left) of zero are called
positive (negative) numbers.

iii. Ordering numbers. a < b means that b = a + c for some
positive number c.
Trichotomy property. For two numbers a and b, exactly one
of the following is true: a < b, a = b, or a > b.
Transitive property. If a < b and b < c, then a < c.
iv.

73

7, 18, 53
0, 3, 8
−5, −1, 0, 17, 23
15 6
1
− , − , 0, , 0.25, 0.123
7
3
2

− 6, − 2,

3, π, 5.020020002 . . .

−11, −3.57, 0,

23

22

2,

57
4

21

0

The distance between points a and b on a number line is
a−b.

2

2

0
Negative numbers

3 < 7, − 2 <

2, 0 < 2

Absolute value.
a = a if a ≥ 0, and a = −a if a < 0.

1

3 = 3;

−4 = −( −4 ) = 4

Positive numbers

74

Chapter P Basic Concepts of Algebra

Definitions, Concepts, and Formulas
v.

Examples

Algebraic properties. Let a, b, and c be real numbers.
Closure

a + b is a real number, a ⋅ b is a real number.
ab = ba
Commutative a + b = b + a,

3+

Associative

[ 5 + ( −3 ) ] + 7 = 5 + [ ( −3 ) + 7 ]

Distributive

(a + b) + c = a + (b + c)

7 is a real number; 2π is a real number.

3 + 5 = 5 + 3; −5 ⋅ 7 = 7 ⋅ ( −5 )

( ab ) c = a ( bc )

( 5 ⋅ 6 ) ⋅ 15 = 5 ⋅ ( 6 ⋅ 15 )

a ⋅ (b + c) = a ⋅ b + a ⋅ c

2( 3 + 7 ) = 2 ⋅ 3 + 2 ⋅ 7

(a + b) ⋅ c = a ⋅ c + b ⋅ c

a + 0 = 0 + a = a,

Identity

a ⋅1 = 1⋅ a = a

1
a + ( −a ) = 0,   a ⋅ = 1,
Inverse
a
properties
	     
where a ≠ 0.
Zero-product properties	
0⋅a = 0 = a⋅0
If a ⋅ b = 0, then a = 0 or b = 0.

−5 + 0 = 0 + 5 = 5; 7 ⋅ 1 = 1 ⋅ 7 = 7
1
15 + ( −5 ) = 0; 15 ⋅
= 1
15
0⋅3 = 0 = 3⋅0

P.2 Integer Exponents and Scientific Notation
i.

If n is a positive integer, then

a4 = a ⋅ a ⋅ a ⋅ a

n = a ⋅ a a
a

n factors

5 0 = 1, π 0 = 1, ( −17 ) 0 = 1



1
 a ≠ 0.
a −n = n 
a 
a0 = 1

ii.

5 −3 =

1
53

Rules of exponents. Denominators and exponents attached to
a base of zero are assumed not to be zero.
a m ⋅ a n = a m+ n
am
= a m− n
an

Product rule
Quotient rule
Power-of-a-power rule
Power-of-a-product rule
Power-of-a-quotient rules

(am )

n

7 3 ⋅ 7 2 = 7 3+ 2 = 7 5
56
= 5 6− 2 = 5 4
52

= a mn

(a ⋅ b)

n

=

an ⋅ bn

( ab ) = ab
( ab ) = ( ba ) = ba
n

( 3u )

= a 3 ⋅ 4 = a 12

4

= 3 4 u 4 = 81u 4

3

( 2x ) = 2x = x8

n

n

3

3

3

n

−n

4

(a3 )

n
n

2
2
2
 3 −2
  = y = y = y
2
y
3
3
9

( )

P.3 Polynomials
An algebraic expression of the form
an

xn

+ a n−1

x n−1 +  + a

2

x2

+ a1 x + a 0 ,

5 x 3 − 2 x + 7 is a polynomial of degree 3, with leading term
5 x 3 and constant term 7.

where n is a nonnegative integer, is a polynomial in x. If a n ≠ 0,
then n is called the degree of the polynomial. The term a n x n is the
leading term, and a 0 is the constant term.
To add or subtract two polynomials, we add or subtract the coefficients of the like terms.

( 5x 3 − 2 x 2 + 3x + 1) + ( 2 x 3 + 5x − 7 )

= 5x 3 − 2 x 2 + 3x + 1 + 2 x 3 + 0 x 2 + 5x − 7
= ( 5 + 2 ) x 3 + ( −2 + 0 ) x 2 + ( 3 + 5 ) x + ( 1 − 7 )
= 7 x 3 − 2 x 2 + 8x − 6
( 3x 2 + 5x − 3 ) − ( 2 x 2 − x − 7 )

= 3x 2 + 5x − 3 − 2 x 2 + x + 7
= ( 3 − 2 ) x 2 + ( 5 + 1) x − 3 + 7
= x 2 + 6x + 4

Review and Tests

Definitions, Concepts, and Formulas

Examples

To multiply two polynomials, distribute each term of the first
polynomial to each term of the second polynomial and then combine like terms.

( x + 5 )( x 2 − 3 x + 7 )

= x ( x 2 − 3 x + 7 ) + 5( x 2 − 3 x + 7 )
= x 3 − 3 x 2 + 7 x + 5 x 2 − 15 x + 35
= x 3 + ( −3 + 5 ) x 2 + ( 7 − 15 ) x + 35
= x 3 + 2 x 2 − 8 x + 35

Special Products
( x + a )( x + b ) = x 2 + ( a + b ) x + ab

( x + 2 )( x − 3 ) =

( A + B )( A − B ) =

( x + 2 y )( x − 2 y ) = x 2 − ( 2 y ) 2

( A + B)

2

( A − B )2

=

A2 − B2
A2

+ 2 AB + B 2

( 2 x + 3y )

2

( 3x − 4 )

2

x2 − x − 6
= x 2 − 4y 2

2

= ( 2 x ) + 2( 2 x )( 3 y ) + ( 3 y ) 2
= 4 x 2 + 12 xy + 9 y 2

= A 2 − 2 AB + B 2

= ( 3 x ) 2 − 2( 3 x )( 4 ) + 4 2
= 9 x 2 − 24 x + 16

P.4 Factoring Polynomials
Factoring formulas:
A 2 − B 2 = ( A − B )( A + B )
A 2 + 2 AB + B 2 = ( A + B )

4 x 2 − 25 = ( 2 x + 5 )( 2 x − 5 )
4 x 2 + 12 x + 9 = ( 2 x + 3 ) 2

2

A 2 − 2 AB + B 2 = ( A − B ) 2

9 x 2 − 12 xy + 4 y 2 = ( 3 x − 2 y ) 2

A 3 − B 3 = ( A − B )( A 2 + AB + B 2 )

x 3 − 8 = ( x − 2 )( x 2 + 2 x + 4 )

A3 + B3

8 x 3 + 27 y 3 = ( 2 x + 3 y )( 4 x 2 − 6 xy + 9 y 2 )

= ( A + B )( A 2 − AB + B 2 )

P.5 Rational Expressions
The quotient of two polynomials is called a rational expression.
i.

Multiplication and division.
A C
A⋅C
⋅
=
B⋅D
B D
A
B = A÷ C = A⋅ D = A⋅D
C
B
D
B C
B⋅C
D

2 5
10
⋅ =
3 xy
3x y
18 xy 3
9y 2
3x
5x 2
3x 6 y 3
÷
=
⋅
=
=
4y
6y 3
4 y 5x 2
20 x 2 y
10 x

All of the denominators are assumed not to be zero.
ii.

Addition and subtraction.
A
C
A⋅D ± B⋅C
±
=
B
D
B⋅D

2 y + 3x
2
3
;
+ =
x
y
xy

2 x − 3y
y
x
− =
3
2
6

The denominators are assumed not to be zero.

P.6 Rational Exponents and Radicals
i. If a > 0, then n a = b means that b n = a and b > 0.
ii.

n

If a < 0 and n is odd, then a = b means that b n = a. If
a < 0 and n is even, then n a is not defined.

iii. When all expressions are defined,
1

m

a m / n = n a m = ( n a ) ; a −m / n =
iv.

a2 = a

a

.
m/ n

4

81 = 3
2

2

83 = ( 3 8 ) = 22 = 4
3 2 = 3;

( −3 ) 2

= 3

75

76

Chapter P Basic Concepts of Algebra

REVIEW EXERCISES
Building Skills
1. List all of the numbers in the set

{ 4, 7, −5, 12 , 0.31, 0, 0.2, 12 } that are
a. natural numbers.
b. whole numbers.
c. integers.
d. rational numbers.
e. irrational numbers.
f. real numbers.

3. π ( x + y ) = π x + π y
5. ( x 2 + 1 ) ⋅ 1 = x 2 + 1
In Exercises 6 and 7, write each interval in inequality notation
and then graph each interval.
7. ( −∞, 1 ]

In Exercises 8 and 9, write each inequality in interval notation
and then graph the interval.
9. x > 0

In Exercises 10–13, rewrite each expression without absolute
value bars.
−12
10.
2

11. 2 − −3

12. −5 − −7

13. 1 − 15

y−6
xy

15. ( −4 )3

2 18
2 17

17. 2 4 − 5 ⋅ 3 2

18. ( 2 3 ) 2

19. −251/ 2

1/ 4

( )

1
20.
16

21. 8 4 / 3

22. ( −27 ) 2 / 3

25 −3/ 2
23.
36

24. 81−3/ 2

25. 2 ⋅ 5 3

26. 3 2 ⋅ 2 5

21 × 10 6
27.
3 × 10 7

28.

29.

30.

4

10, 000
( −9 )

2

( )

52

31. 3 −125

32. 31/ 2 ⋅ 27 1/ 2

33. 64 −1/ 3

34.

35. ( 3 + 2 )( 3 − 2 )

5

20

x

; x = 4, y = 2

y
x
+
; x = 6, y = −3
x
y
1
41. x y ; x = 16, y = −
2
40.

42.

x −6
x −9

43. ( x −2 )−5

44.

x −3
y −2

 x − 3 − 2
45.  −1 
y 

 xy 3 −2
46.  5 
x y

47. ( 16 x −2 / 3 y −4 / 3 )
−3 / 2

48. ( 49 x −4 / 3 y 2 / 3 )

49.

3/ 2

( 64xy )

−9 / 2 −2 / 3

−3

In Exercises 50–66, simplify each expression. Assume that all
variables represent positive numbers.
50. ( 2 x 2 / 3 )( 5 x 3/ 4 )

51. ( 7 x 1/ 4 )( 3 x 3/ 2 )
53.

x 5 ( 2 x )3
4x 3

55.

( x xy )

56. 7 3 + 3 75

57.

64
11

58.

59. 7 6 − 3 24

52.

In Exercises 14–37, evaluate each expression.

16.

3 −2 ⋅ 7 0
18 −1

In Exercises 42–49, simplify each expression. Write each
answer with only positive exponents. Assume that all variables represent positive numbers.

4. ( x 2 + 1 ) ⋅ 0 = 0 ⋅ ( x 2 + 1 )

14. −5 0

37.

In Exercises 38–41, evaluate each expression for the given
values of x and y.

39.

2. 3 x + 1 = 1 + 3 x

8. 1 ≤ x < 4

−3 / 2

( 161 )

38. 4 ( x + 7 ) + 2 y; x = 3, y = 4

In Exercises 2–5, state which property of the real numbers is
being used.

6. [ −2, 3 )

36.

54.

32 x 2 / 3
8 x 1/ 4
1/ 2

( 64 x 4 y 4 )

4y 2

180 x 2
3

60. 7 54 +
62.

3

128

75 x 2

64. 5 2 x − 2 8 x

4 /3

2

6

1/ 3

61.

2x

63.

100 x 3
4x

6x

65. 4 3 135 + 3 40

66. y 3 56 x − 3 189 xy 3
In Exercises 67–70, rationalize the denominator of each
expression.
67.

7
3

69.

1−
1+

3
3

68.

4
9− 6

70.

2 5+3
3−4 5

Review Exercises
71. Write 3.7 × ( 6.23 × 10 12 ) in scientific notation.
3.19 × 10 −9
72. Write
in decimal notation.
0.02 × 10 −3
In Exercises 73–82, perform the indicated operations. Leave
the resulting polynomial in standard form.
73. ( x 3 − 6 x 2 + 4 x − 2 ) + ( 3 x 3 − 6 x 2 + 5 x − 4 )
74. ( 10 x 3 + 8 x 2 − 7 x − 3 ) − ( 5 x 3 − x 2 + 4 x − 9 )
75. ( 4 x 4 + 3 x 3 − 5 x 2 + 9 ) + ( 5 x 4 + 8 x 3 − 7 x 2 + 5 )
76. ( 8 x 4 + 4 x 3 + 3 x 2 + 5 ) + ( 7 x 4 + 3 x 3 + 8 x 2 − 3 )
77. ( x − 12 )( x − 3 )
78. ( x − 7 ) 2
79. ( x 5 − 2 )( x 5 + 2 )
80. ( 4 x − 3 )( 4 x + 3 )

113.

x 2 − 4 2 x 2 − 3x
⋅
4x 2 − 9
2x + 4

114.

3 x 2 − 17 x + 10 x 2 + 3 x + 2
⋅ 2
x 2 − 4x − 5
x + x−2

1
−x
2
x
115.
1
+ x
x2

x
+ x
116. x − 2
1
x2 − 4

x
+ x
3
x
−
117.
x
−x
3−x

18
x
−5
118.
12
x −1−
x−5
x+2−

119. Assuming that a right triangle has legs a and b of lengths 20
and 21, respectively, find the length of the hypotenuse.

82. ( 3 x − 6 )( x 2 + 2 x + 4 )
In Exercises 83–104, factor each polynomial completely.
83.

x 2 + 2x − 8 x + 2
⋅
x 2 + 5x + 6 x + 4

Applying the Concepts

81. ( 2 x + 5 )( 3 x − 11 )

x 2 − 3 x − 10

112.

77

84.

x 2 + 10 x + 9

85. 24 x 2 − 38 x − 11

86. 15 x 2 + 33 x + 18

87. x ( x + 11 ) + 5( x + 11 )

88. x 3 − x 2 + 2 x − 2

89. x 4 − x 3 + 7 x − 7

90. 9 x 2 + 24 x + 16

91. 10 x 2 + 23 x + 12

92. 8 x 2 + 18 x + 9

93. 12 x 2 + 7 x − 12

94. x 4 − 4 x 2

95. 4 x 2 − 49

96. 16 x 2 − 81

97. x 2 + 12 x + 36

98. x 2 − 10 x + 100

99. 64 x 2 + 48 x + 9

100. 8 x 3 − 1

101. 8 x 3 + 27

102. 7 x 3 − 7

103. x 3 + 5 x 2 − 16 x − 80

104. x 3 + 6 x 2 − 9 x − 54

In Exercises 105–118, perform the indicated operation.
Simplify your answer.
105.

4
10
−
x−9
9−x

106.

2
6
+ 2
x 2 − 3x + 2
x −1

107.

3x + 5
3x − 2
− 2
x 2 + 14 x + 48
x + 10 x + 16

108.

x+7
5 − 3x
− 2
x 2 − 7x + 6
x − 2 x − 24

109.

x −1
x+1
−
x+1
x −1

110.

x3 − 1
6x + 6
⋅
3x 2 − 3 x 2 + x + 1

111.

x −1
4x 2 − 9
⋅
2x − 3 2x 2 − x − 1

120. One leg of a right triangle measures 5 inches. The hypotenuse
is 1 inch longer than the other leg. Find the length of the
hypotenuse.
121. Find the area A and the perimeter P of a right triangle with
hypotenuse of length 20 and a leg of length 12.
1
122. Find the volume V of a box of length , width 7, and
3
height 60.
123. Find the area of a rectangular rug if its width is 6 feet and
its diagonal measures 10 feet.
124. The amount of alcohol in the body of a person who drinks
x grams of alcohol every hour over a relatively long period
4.2 x
grams. How many grams of alcohol will be in the
is
10 − x
body of a person who drinks 2 grams of alcohol every hour
(over a relatively long period)?
125. Because of the earth’s curvature, the maximum distance
a person can see from a height h above the ground is
7920 h + h 2 , where h is given in miles. What is the
maximum distance an airplane pilot can see when the plane
is 0.7 mile above the ground?
126. A contaminated reservoir contains 2% arsenic. The percentage (in decimal) of arsenic in the reservoir can be reduced
by adding water. Assuming that the reservoir contains a
million gallons of water, write a rational expression whose
values give the percentage of arsenic in the reservoir when
x gallons of water are added to it.
127. The height (in feet) of an open fruit crate that is three times
36 − 3 x 2
, where x is the
as long as it is wide is given by
8x
width of the box. Find the height of a fruit crate that is
2 feet wide.
128. An object thrown down with an initial velocity of v 0 feet per
second will travel 16t 2 + v 0 t feet in t seconds. How far
has an orange that is dropped from a hot air balloon traveled
after 9 seconds if it has an initial downward velocity of
25 feet per second?

78

Chapter P Basic Concepts of Algebra

PRACTICE TEST
Rewrite each expression without absolute value bars.
1. 7 − −3
2.

2 − 100

3. Evaluate

x − 3y
+ xy for x = 5 and y = −3.
2

4. Determine the domain of the variable x in the
2x
and write it in interval
expression
( x − 3 )( x + 9 )
notation.
Simplify each expression. Assume that all expressions containing
variables are defined.
5.

( −3xx y )

7.

75 x −

2

3

6. 3 −8 x 6
27 x

8. −16 −3/ 2

− 1/ 2



9. 
 25 x 3 y 3 
x −2 y 4

10. Rationalize the denominator of the expression

5
.
1− 3

Perform the indicated operations. Write the resulting polynomial
in standard form.
11. 4 ( x 2 − 3 x + 2 ) + 3( 5 x 2 − 2 x + 1 )
12. ( x − 2 )( 5 x − 1 )
13. ( x 2 + 3 y 2 ) 2

14. A circular rug has a border of uniform width. The distance
from the center of the rug to the inner and outer edges
of the border are 5 feet and x feet, respectively. Write a
completely factored polynomial that gives the area of the
border.
Factor each polynomial completely.
15. x 2 − 5 x + 6
16. 9 x 2 + 12 x + 4
17. 8 x 3 − 27
Perform the indicated operations and simplify the result.
Leave your answer in factored form.
6 − 3x
12
18. 2
−
x −4
2x + 4
1
2
x
19.
1
9− 2
x
20. Find the length of the hypotenuse of a right triangle with legs
a and b of lengths 35 and 12, respectively.

1

Equations and
Inequalities

TOPICS
1.1 Linear Equations in
One Variable
1.2 Applications of
Linear Equations:
Modeling
1.3 Quadratic Equations
1.4 Complex Numbers:
Quadratic Equations
with Complex
Solutions
1.5 Solving Other
Types of Equations
1.6 Inequalities
1.7 Equations and
Inequalities
Involving Absolute
Value

Equations and inequalities are useful in analyzing designs
found in the art and architecture of ancient civilizations, in
understanding the dazzling geometric constructions that
abound in nature, and in solving problems common to
industry and daily life.

79

80

Chapter 1 Equations and Inequalities

GETTING READY

for the Next Section

REVIEW CONCEPTS
Interval and set notations (Section P.1, pages 8–9)
Polynomial vocabulary (Section P.3, pages 30-31)
REVIEW SKILLS
Arithmetic of fractions (Section P.1, pages 13-14)
In Exercises GR1–GR4, perform the indicated operation.
7
3
3
2
+
GR2.
−
GR1.
3
2
6
3
3 12
3
12
⋅
GR4.
÷
2 7
5
15
Adding and subtracting polynomials (Section P.1,
pages 31–32)
GR3.

In Exercises GR5–GR8 simplify the given expression.
GR5. −7 x + 2 x
GR6. x + ( −5 x )
GR7. ( 4 x − 5 ) + ( 7 x − 3 )

1.1

GR8. −6 x 2 − ( −2 x 2 )

Evaluate algebraic expressions. (Section P.1, pages 14–15)
In Exercises GR9–GR12, evaluate the following expressions
for the given values of the variables.
GR9. 2 − 3 x, x = −1
GR10. −4 + 2 x, x = −2
2
GR11.
, x = −1
3−x
−2
, x = −5
x+3
Arithmetic of rational expressions (Section P.5,
pages 52–55)
In Exercises GR13–GR14, perform the indicated operations
and simplify the result.
2
1
GR13.
−
x
5
1
2
GR14.
+
x−3
5
GR12.

Linear Equations in One Variable
Objectives

Videos for
this Section

1

Learn the vocabulary and concepts used in studying equations.

2

Solve linear equations in one variable.

3

Solve formulas for a specific variable.

Bungee-Jumping TV Contestants
England’s
Oxford
Dangerous
Sports Club started the modern
version of the sport of “bungee” (or
bungy) jumping on April 1, 1978,
from the Clifton Suspension Bridge
in Bristol, England. Bungee cords
consist of hundreds of continuouslength rubber strands encased in a
nylon sheath. One end of the cord
is tied to a solid structure such as a
crane or bridge, and the other end
is tied via padded ankle straps to
the jumper’s ankles. The jumper
jumps, and if things go as planned, the cord extends like a rubber band and the jumper bounces
up and down until coming to a halt. Suppose a television adventure program has its contestants
bungee jump from a bridge 120 feet above the water. The bungee cord that is used has a 140%–
150% elongation, meaning that its extended length will be the original length plus a maximum of
an additional 150% of its original length. If the show’s producer wants to make sure the jumper
does not get closer than 10 feet to the water and if no contestant is more than 7 feet tall, how long
can the bungee cord be? Using the information from this section, we learn in Example 6 that the
cord should be about 41 feet long.

Section 1.1 Linear Equations in One Variable

Objective 1

81

Definitions
An equation is a statement that two mathematical expressions are equal. For example,
7−5 = 2

SIDE NOTE
When finding the domain of a
variable, remember that
1. Division by 0 is undefined.
2. The square root (or any even
root) of a negative number
is not a real number.

is an equation. In algebra, however, we are generally more interested in equations that
contain variables.
An equation in one variable is a statement that two expressions, with at least one
containing the variable, are equal. For example, 2 x − 3 = 7 is an equation in the variable x.
The expressions 2 x − 3 and 7 are the sides of the equation. The domain of the variable in
an equation is the set of all real numbers for which both sides of the equation are defined.
EXAMPLE 1

Finding the Domain of the Variable

Find the domain of the variable x in each of the following equations.
a. 2 =
SIDE NOTE
Frequently, when only a few
numbers are excluded from
the domain of the variable,
we write the exceptions on
the side of the equation. In
Example 1 part a, if we wanted
to specify the domain of the
variable, we would simply
5
write 2 =
, x ≠ 1.
x −1
This domain can be written in
interval notation as
( −∞, 1 ) ∪ ( 1, ∞ ).

5
    b. x − 2 =
x −1

x     c. 2 x − 3 = 7

Solution
5
, the left side of the equation does not contain x. The right
x −1
5
, is not defined if x = 1 because division by 0 is undeside of the equation,
x −1
fined. The domain of x is the set of all real numbers except the number 1.
b. The square root of a negative number is not a real number; so x, the right side of
the equation x − 2 = x , is defined only when x ≥ 0. The left side is defined for
all real numbers. So the domain of x in this equation is {x | x ≥ 0}, or in interval
notation, [ 0, ∞ ).
c. Because both sides of the equation 2 x − 3 = 7 are defined for all real numbers, the
domain is {x | x is a real number}, or in interval notation, ( −∞, ∞ ).
a. In the equation 2 =

Practice Problem 1. Find the domain of the variable x in each of the following
equations.
x
3
−7 = 5
= 4
c.
a.
b.
x − 1 = 0

3
2−x
When the variable in an equation is replaced with a specific value from its domain, the
resulting statement may be true or false. For example, in the equation 2 x − 3 = 7, if we
let x = 1, we obtain
2( 1 ) − 3 = 7 or −1 = 7,
which is obviously false. However, if we replace x with 5, we obtain 2 ( 5 ) − 3 = 7, a
true statement. Those values (if any) of the variable that result in a true statement are called
solutions or roots of the equation. Thus, 5 is a solution (or root) of the equation 2 x − 3 = 7.
We also say that 5 satisfies the equation 2 x − 3 = 7. To solve an equation means to find all
solutions of the equation; the set of all solutions of an equation is called its solution set. The
process of finding the solution set of an equation is called solving the equation.

Identities, Conditional Equations, and
Inconsistent Equations
An equation that is satisfied by every real number in the domain of the variable is called an
identity. The equations
2 ( x + 3 ) = 2 x + 6 and

x 2 − 9 = ( x + 3 )( x − 3 )

are examples of identities. You should recognize that these equations are examples of the
distributive property and the difference of squares, respectively.

82

Chapter 1 Equations and Inequalities

SIDE NOTE
Inconsistent equations have no
solutions.

An equation that is not an identity but is satisfied by at least one real number is called
a conditional equation. To verify that an equation is a conditional equation, you must find
at least one number that is a solution of the equation and at least one number that is not a
solution of the equation. The equation 2 x − 3 = 7 is an example of a conditional equation: 5 satisfies the equation, but 1 does not.
An equation that no number satisfies is called an inconsistent equation. The solution
set of an inconsistent equation is designated by the empty set symbol, ∅. The equation
x = x + 5 is an example of an inconsistent equation. It is inconsistent because no number
is 5 more than itself.
In summary, there are three types of equations: identities, conditional equations, and
inconsistent equations.

Equivalent Equations
SIDE NOTE
Squaring both sides of an
equation does not result in an
equivalent equation. For
example, x = 2 has one
solution but x 2 = 4 has two
solutions, x = 2 and x = −2.

Objective 2

Equations that have the same solution set are called equivalent equations. For example,
equations x = 4 and 3 x = 12 are equivalent equations with solution set { 4 }.
In general, to solve an equation in one variable, we replace the given equation with a
sequence of equivalent equations until we obtain an equation whose solution is obvious,
such as x = 4. The following operations yield equivalent equations.
Procedures That Result in Equivalent Equations
Procedures

Given Equation

Equivalent Equation

Simplify expressions on
either side by eliminating
parentheses, combining
like terms, etc.

( 2 x − 1) − ( x + 1) = 4

2x − 1 − x − 1 = 4
or x − 2 = 4

Add (or subtract) the
same expression (with
the same domain) on both
sides of the equation.

x−2 = 4

x−2+2 = 4+2
or x = 6

Multiply (or divide) both
sides of the equation by
the same nonzero number.

2x = 8

1
1
⋅ 2x = ⋅ 8
2
2
or x = 4

Interchange the two sides
of the equation.

−3 = x

x = −3

Solving Linear Equations in One Variable
Linear Equations
A conditional linear equation in one variable, such as x, is an equation that can be
written in the standard form
ax + b = 0,
where a and b are real numbers with a ≠ 0.
Because the highest exponent on the variable in a linear equation is 1( x = x 1 ), a linear
equation is also called a first-degree equation. We can see that the linear equation
ax + b = 0 with a ≠ 0 has exactly one solution by using the following steps:
ax + b = 0
ax = −b
b
x=− .
a

Original equation, a ≠ 0
Subtract b from both sides.
Divide both sides by a.

Section 1.1 Linear Equations in One Variable

83

In the Procedure In Action box, we describe a step-by-step procedure for solving a
linear equation in one variable.

PROCEDURE IN ACTION
EXAMPLE 2

Solving Conditional Linear Equations in One Variable

Objective

Example

Solve a linear equation in one variable.

Solve

1
2
1
x − = ( 1 − 3 x ).
3
3
2
1
2
1
x − = (1 − 3x )
3
3
2

Step 1 Eliminate fractions, if any. Multiply
both sides of the equation by the least common
denominator (LCD) of all of the fractions.

6

( 13 x − 23 ) = 6 ⋅ 12 1 − 3x
(

2
1
x − 6 ⋅ = 3( 1 − 3 x )
3
3

Original equation
Multiply both sides by
6 (LCD) to eliminate
fractions.

)

Step 2 Simplify. Simplify both sides of the
equation by removing parentheses and other grouping
symbols (if any) and combining like terms.

6⋅

Step 3 Isolate the variable term. Add appropriate
expressions to both sides so that when both sides are
simplified, the terms containing the variable are on
one side and all constant terms are on the other side.

2x − 4 + 9 x + 4 = 3 − 9x + 9 x + 4

2x − 4 = 3 − 9x

Step 4 Combine terms. Combine terms containing
the variable to obtain one term that contains the
variable as a factor.

11x = 7

Step 5 Isolate the variable. Divide both sides by
the coefficient of the variable to obtain the solution.

x =

Step 6 Check the solution. Substitute the solution
into the original equation to check for computational
errors.

Check Substitute

7
11

Distribute on the left side;
simplify on the right.
Simplify on the left side;
distribute on the right.
Add 9 x + 4
to both sides.

Collect like terms and
combine constants.
Divide both sides by 11.

7
for x in both sides of the original
11
equation.

5
5
= − .
11
11
2
3
1
7
Practice Problem 2. Solve − x = − x.
3
2
6
3

EXAMPLE 3

The result should be −

Solving a Linear Equation

Solve 6 x − [ 3 x − 2 ( x − 2 ) ] = 11.
Solution
Step 2

6 x − [ 3 x − 2 ( x − 2 ) ] = 11

Original equation

6 x − [ 3 x − 2 ( x − 2 ) ] = 11

Remove innermost parentheses by
distributing −2 ( x − 2 ) = −2 x + 4.

6 x − [ 3 x − 2 x + 4 ] = 11

Remove square brackets and change
the sign of each enclosed term.
Combine like terms.

6 x − 3 x + 2 x − 4 = 11
5 x − 4 = 11

84

Chapter 1 Equations and Inequalities

Step 3

5 x − 4 + 4 = 11 + 4

Step 4

5 x = 15
5x
15
=
5
5
x = 3

Step 5

Add 4 to both sides.
Simplify both sides in Step 3.
Divide both sides by 5.
Simplify.

The apparent solution is 3.
Check Substitute x = 3 into the original equation. You should obtain
Step 6
11 = 11. Thus, 3 is the only solution of the original equation; so { 3 } is its solution set.

Practice Problem 3. Solve 3 x − [ 2 x − 6 ( x + 1) ] = −1.
If solving a linear equation results in a false statement, such as 4 = −3, the equation
is inconsistent.
EXAMPLE 4

Solving a Linear Equation That Is Inconsistent

Solve 5 x − [ 3 x + 2 ( x − 1 ) ] = 1.
Solution
Step 2
5x − [ 3x + 2 ( x − 1) ] = 1

Original equation

5x − [ 3x + 2 x − 2 ] = 1

Remove innermost parentheses by
distributing 2 ( x − 1 ) = 2 x − 2.

5x − 3x − 2 x + 2 = 1

Remove square brackets and change
the sign of each enclosed term.

2 = 1

Combine like terms.

Because 2 = 1 is false, no number satisfies this equation. It is inconsistent.
The solution set is ∅.
Practice Problem 4. Solve 3 x − [ 2 x − 6 ( x + 1) ] = 7 x − 1. 
If solving a linear equation results in an equivalent equation that is always true, such as
3 = 3, the equation is an identity.
EXAMPLE 5

Solving an Equation That Is an Identity

Solve 1 − 5 y + 2 ( y + 7 ) = 2 y + 5( 3 − y ).
Solution
Step 2
1 − 5y + 2 ( y + 7 ) = 2 y + 5 ( 3 − y )
1 − 5 y + 2 y + 14 = 2 y + 15 − 5 y
15 − 3 y = 15 − 3 y
Step 3  	

15 − 3 y + 3 y = 15 − 3 y + 3 y
15 = 15

Original equation
Distributive property
Collect like terms and combine
constants on each side.
Add 3 y to both sides.
Simplify.

We have shown that 15 = 15, a true statement, is equivalent to the original
equation. Consequently, the original equation is an identity and the solution
set is ( −∞, ∞ ) .
Practice Problem 5. Solve the equation 2 ( 3 x − 6 ) + 5 = 12 − ( 19 − 6 x ).

Section 1.1 Linear Equations in One Variable

85

Identifying Types of Linear Equations
1. An equation that is satisfied by all values in the domain of the variable is an identity.
For example, 2 ( x − 1 ) = 2 x − 2. When you try to solve an identity, you get a
true statement that does not depend on the variable, such as 3 = 3 or 0 = 0.
2. An equation that is not an identity but is satisfied by at least one number in the
domain of the variable is a conditional equation. For example, 2 x = 6 is a linear
conditional equation; x = 3 is a solution, but x = 0 is not.
3. An equation that is not satisfied by any value of the variable is an inconsistent
equation. For example, x = x + 2 is an inconsistent equation. Because no
number is 2 more than itself, the solution set of the equation x = x + 2 is ∅.
When you try to solve an inconsistent equation, you obtain a false statement
such as 0 = 2.

EXAMPLE 6

Bungee-Jumping TV Contestants

The introduction to this section described a television show on which a bungee cord with
140%–150% elongation is used for contestants’ bungee jumping from a bridge 120 feet
above the water. The show’s producer wants to make sure the jumper does not get closer
than 10 feet to the water. How long can the bungee cord be, given that no contestant is
more than 7 feet tall?
Solution
Step 1 We want the extended cord plus the length of the jumper’s body to be a
minimum of 10 feet above the water. To be safe, we determine the maximum
extended length of the cord, add the height of the tallest possible contestant,
and ensure that this total length is 10 feet above the water.
Step 2 Let x = length, in feet, of the cord to be used.
Step 3 Then x + 1.5 x = 2.5 x is the maximum extended length (in feet) of the cord
(with 150% elongation). We have
Extended
+
cord length

Body
Height of bridge
10-foot
+
=
length
buffer
above the water

2.5 x + 7 + 10 = 120.
Step 4 		

2.5 x + 17 = 120
2.5 x = 103
x = 41.2 feet

Step 5
Step 6

Replace descriptions with
arithmetic expressions.
Combine constants.
Subtract 17 from both sides.
Divide both sides by 2.5.

If the length of the cord is less than 41.2 feet, all conditions are met.
Check 41.2 + 1.5( 41.2 ) + 7 + 10 = 120; so any length less than 41.2 ft
will work.

Practice Problem 6. What length of cord should be used in Example 6 if the elongation
is 200% instead of 140%–150%?

Objective 3

Formulas
Solving equations that arise from everyday experiences is one of the most important uses
of algebra. An equation that expresses a relationship between two or more variables is
called a formula.

86

Chapter 1 Equations and Inequalities

8F

8C

120

50
40
30
20
10
0

100
80
60
40
20
0
220
240

210
220
230
240

EXAMPLE 7

Converting Temperatures

The formula for converting the temperature in degrees Celsius ( C ) to degrees Fahrenheit ( F ) is
F =

9
C + 32.
5

While planning a trip to the United States, a London resident notes that the local temperature will be 86° Fahrenheit. What is the temperature in degrees Celsius? (Temperatures are
recorded in degrees Celsius in England.)
Solution We first substitute 86 for F in the formula

F =

9
C + 32
5

to obtain

86 =

9
C + 32.
5

We now solve this equation for C.
5( 86 ) = 5

( 95 C + 32 )

Multiply both sides by 5.

430 = 9C + 160

Simplify.

270 = 9C

Subtract 160 from both sides.

270
= C
9
30 = C

Divide both sides by 9.
Simplify.

Thus, 86° F converts to 30 ° C.
Practice Problem 7. Use the formula in Example 7 to find the temperature in degrees
Celsius, assuming that the temperature is 50° Fahrenheit.
In Example 7, we specified F = 86 and solved the equation for C. A more general
result can be obtained by assuming that F is a fixed number, or constant, and solving for C.
This process is called solving for a specified variable.
EXAMPLE 8

Solving for a Specified Variable

a. Solve F =

9
C + 32 for C.
5

b. Solve S = 2 w + 2 h + 2w h for h.

Solution
a. F = 9 C + 32
5
F − 32 =

Original equation
9
C
5

Subtract 32 from both sides.

5(
5 5 9
Multiply both sides by ; ⋅ = 1.
F − 32 ) = C
9
9 9 5
5
C = ( F − 32 )
or
9
b. S = 2 w + 2 h + 2w h

Original equation

S − 2 w = 2 h + 2w h

Subtract 2 w from both sides so that
all terms with h are on one side.

S − 2 w = ( 2 + 2w ) h

Factor out h.

S − 2 w
= h
2 + 2w
S − 2 w
or
h =
2 + 2w

Divide both sides by 2 + 2w .

Practice Problem 8. Solve P = 2 + 2w for w .

Section 1.1 Linear Equations in One Variable

EXAMPLE 9

87

Applying a Geometry Formula

A cereal box that is 12 inches high and 8 inches wide holds 240 cubic inches of cereal.
How deep is the box?
Solution
Use the following formula: V = hwd, where V is the volume, h is the height, w is the
width, and d is the depth of the cereal box.
240 = ( 12 )( 8 ) d
d = 2.5

Replace V with 240, h with 12, and w with 8.
Divide both sides by 96.

The cereal box is 2.5 inches deep.
Practice Problem 9. A rectangular suitcase is 21 inches high, 13 inches wide, and
9 inches deep. Find the volume of the suitcase.

1.1

Exercises

Videos for
select exercises

Concepts and Vocabulary
1. The domain of the variable in an equation is the set of
all real numbers for which both sides of the equation
are
.
2. Standard form for a linear equation in x is

In Exercises 14–18, find the domain of the variable in each
equation. Write the answer in interval notation.
14. ( 2 − x ) − 4 x = 7 − 3( x + 4 )
.

3. Two equations with the same solution set are called
.
4. A conditional equation is an equation that is not true for
values of the variables.
5. True or False. A linear equation that is equivalent to the
equation 0 = 4 is a conditional equation.
6. True or False. A linear equation that is equivalent to the
equation −1 = −1 is an identity.
7. True or False. The equation x − 2 = 0 is equivalent to the
equation 6 − 3 x = 0.
8. True or False. Solving P + 2 b =  for b results in

b = − P.
2

In Exercises 9–13, determine whether the given value of the
variable is a solution of the equation.
9. x − 2 = 5 x + 6
a. x = 0
b. x = −2
10. 8 x + 3 = 14 x − 1

11.

2
1
1
= +
x
3
x+2
a. x = 4

12. ( x − 3 )( 2 x + 1 ) = 0
1
a. x =
2
13. 2 x + 3 x = 5 x
a. x = 157

y
3
=
y −1
y+2

16.

1
= 2+
y

17.
18.

b. x =

2
3

b. x = 1
b. x = 3

y

3x
( x − 3 )( x − 4 )

= 2x + 9

1
= x2 − 1
x

In Exercises 19–22, determine whether the given equation is
an identity. If the equation is not an identity, give a value that
demonstrates that fact.
19. 2 x + 3 = 5 x + 1
20. 3 x + 4 = 6 x + 2 − ( 3 x − 2 )
21.

Building Skills

a. x = −1

15.

1
1
2+ x
+ =
x
2
2x

22.

1
1
1
= +
x+3
x
3

In Exercises 23–48, solve each equation.
23. 3 x + 5 = 14
24. 2 x − 17 = 7
25. −10 x + 12 = 32
26. −2 x + 5 = 6
27. 3 − y = −4
28. 2 − 7 y = 23
29. 7 x + 7 = 2( x + 1 )
30. 3( x + 2 ) = 4 − x
31. 3( 2 − y ) + 5 y = 3 y
32. 9 y − 3( y − 1 ) = 6 + y
33. 4 y − 3 y + 7 − y = 2 − ( 7 − y )

b. x = −2046

34. 3( y − 1 ) = 6 y − 4 + 2 y − 4 y

88

Chapter 1 Equations and Inequalities

35. 3( x − 2 ) + 2( 3 − x ) = 1
36. 2 x − 3 − ( 3 x − 1) = 6
37. 2 x + 3( x − 4 ) = 7 x + 10
38. 3( 2 − 3 x ) − 4 x = 3 x − 10
39. 4[ x + 2( 3 − x ) ] = 2 x + 1
40. 3 − [ x − 3( x + 2 ) ] = 4
41. 3( 4 y − 3 ) = 4[ y − ( 4 y − 3 ) ]
42. 5 − ( 6 y + 9 ) + 2 y = 2 ( y + 1 )
43. 2 x − 3( 2 − x ) = ( x − 3 ) + 2 x + 1
44. 5( x − 3 ) − 6( x − 4 ) = −5
2x + 1
x+4
45.
−
= 1
9
6

64. Hole dimensions. If a box-shaped hole 7 feet long and
3 feet wide holds 168 cubic feet of dirt, how deep must the
hole be?

46.

2 − 3x
x −1
3x
+
=
7
3
7

47.

1− x
5x + 1
2 ( x + 1)
+
= 3−
4
2
8

65. Geometry. The perimeter of a rectangle is 80 feet. Find its
dimensions, assuming that its length is 5 feet less than twice
its width.
66. Geometry. The width of a rectangle is 3 feet more than
one-half its length, and the perimeter of the rectangle is
36 feet. Find its dimensions.

x+4
1
3x + 2
48.
+ 2x − =
3
2
6
In Exercises 49–60, solve each formula for the indicated variable.
49. d = rt for r
50. F = ma for a
51. C = 2πr for r

52. A = 2 πrx + πr 2 for x

53. I ⋅ R = E for R

54. A = P ( 1 + rt ) for t

55. A =

( a + b )h

for h

56. T = a + ( n − 1 ) d for d

57. uv = fu + f v for u

58. R1 R 2 = RR1 + RR 2 for R 2

59. y = mx + b for m

60. ax + by = c for y

2

67. Geometry. A circle has a circumference of 114π centimeters. Find the radius of the circle.
68. Geometry. A rectangle has a perimeter of 28 meters and a
width of 5 meters. Find the length of the rectangle.
69. Storage barrel dimensions. A barrel has a surface area of
6π square meters and a radius of 1 meter. Find the height of
the barrel.
Barrel

Barrel side
2pr
h

Applying the Concepts
61. Towing. A car is towing another car along a straight
horizontal road using a tow rope with a 25% elongation.
Both cars are 14 feet long. How long can the tow rope be so
that the maximum extended length of the whole group is 37
feet?
62. Fly Fishing. A typical fly rod line includes the backing line,
the fly line, and the leader. Your fly line is 100 feet long,
and your leader is 7.5 feet long. The elongation of the leader is
10%, the elongation of the fly line is 25%, and the elongation
of the backing line is 15%. How long should your
backing line be so you can reel in a fish from up to 300 feet
away?

2. Fly line
1. Backing

rectangle
r

Barrel top
h

cylinder

r

r

circle

circle

70. Can dimensions. A can has a volume of 148π cubic
centimeters and a radius of 2 centimeters. Find the height of
the can.
71. Geometry. A trapezoid has an area of 66 square feet and a
height of 6 feet. If one base is 3 feet, what is the length of the
other base?
Trapezoid
3 feet

3. Leader

63. Swimming pool dimensions. The volume of a swimming
pool is 2808 cubic feet. Assuming that the pool is 18 feet long
and 12 feet deep, find its width.

Barrel bottom

6 feet

Section 1.1 Linear Equations in One Variable
72. Geometry. A trapezoid has an area of 35 square centimeters. Assuming that one base is 9 centimeters and the other
base is 11 centimeters, find the height of the trapezoid.
73. Temperature on Mars. On summer days on Mars, close
to its equator, the temperature can be around 20° Celsius.
What is this temperature in degrees Fahrenheit? (Source:
www.universetoday.com)
74. Temperature on the moon. The average daytime temperature on the bright side of the moon is 224.6° Fahrenheit.
What is this temperature in degrees Celsius? (Source: www.
space.com)
75. Temperature in Honolulu, Hawaii. On a rare cold day in
Honolulu, the temperature reached 57° Fahrenheit. What is
this temperature in degrees Celsius, rounded to the nearest
degree?
76. Temperature in Las Vegas, Nevada. On an unusually hot
day in Las Vegas, the temperature reached 47.8° Celsius.
What is this temperature in degrees Fahrenheit, rounded to
the nearest degree?

Beyond the Basics
77. Find a value of k so that 3 x − 1 = k and 7 x + 2 = 16
are equivalent.
5
6
78. Find a value of k so that the equation
=
y−4
y+k
has solution set { 9 } .
3
4
79. Find a value of k so that the equation
=
y−2
y+k
is inconsistent.

82. 9 + a 2 x − ax = 6 x + a 2
(a + b) 2
ax
bx
−
=
b
a
ab
2
x
2x + b
6b 2 + a 2
84. −
−
+
= 0
3
3b
2a
6ab
b ( bx − 1 ) a ( 1 + ax )
85.
−
= 1
a
b
x − 2a
3
b−x
1
86.
− =
+
b
2
2a
2
83.

Critical Thinking / Discussion / Writing
87. Explain whether the equations in each pair are equivalent.
x = 1
a. x 2 = x,
b. x 2 = 9,
x = 3
c. x 2 − 1 = x − 1,
x = 0
2
x
d.
=
x = 2
,
x−2
x−2
88. What is wrong with the following argument?
x = 1.
x2 = x

Let

x2 − 1 =

Multiply both sides by x.

x −1

Subtract 1 from both sides.

x2 − 1
x −1
=
x −1
x −1
( x + 1) ( x − 1)
= 1
x −1
x+1 = 1

Divide both sides by x − 1.
Factor x 2 − 1.
Remove common factor.

1+1 = 1

80. Find a value of k so that the equation
1
1
=
is an identity.
( x − 3 )( x + k )
x2 − 9

Replace x with 1 in the
previous equation.

2 = 1

Add.

In Exercises 81–86, solve each equation for x. Assume
a ≠ 0 and b ≠ 0.
81. a ( a + x ) = b 2 − bx

GETTING READY

for the Next Section

REVIEW CONCEPTS
Equivalent equations (Section 1.1, page 82)
Solving linear equations (Section 1.1, pages 82-84)
REVIEW SKILLS
Adding and subtracting polynomials
(Section P.1, pages 31–32)
In Exercises GR1–GR4, simplify each expression.
GR1. ( 3 x + 7 ) − x + 2 ( 5 − x )

89

GR7.

3x
2x
−
8
3

GR8.

5x
x
−
11
2

Convert the units of measurement.
In Exercises GR9–GR16, fill in the blank
(1 inch = 2.54 centimeters).
GR9. 24 minutes =

hours

GR10. 75 minutes =

hours

GR11. 0.25 hour =

minutes

GR2. −4 ( x − 3 ) − ( 1 − 2 x )

GR12. 2.5 hours =

minutes

GR3. −2 x + 7( x − 2 ) + 4

GR13. 5 yards =

GR4. 6( x − 1 ) + 2 ( 3 x − 5 )

GR14. 1.4 yards =

feet

Arithmetic of rational expressions, least common
denominator (Section P.5, pages 53–55)
2x
x
4x
9x
+
GR6.
−
GR5.
5
2
3
7

GR15. 3 inches =

centimeters

GR16. 10 inches =

centimeters

feet

90

Chapter 1 Equations and Inequalities

1.2

Applications of Linear
Equations: Modeling
Objectives

Videos for
this Section

1

Learn modeling procedures for solving applied problems.

2

Use linear equations to model applied problems.

Bomb Threat on the Queen Elizabeth 2
While travelling from New York to Southampton,
England, the captain of the Queen Elizabeth 2
received a message that a bomb was on board
and that it was timed to go off during the voyage. A search by crew members proved fruitless, so members of the Royal Marine Special
Boat Squadrons bomb disposal unit were flown
out on a Royal Air Force Hercules aircraft and
parachuted into the Atlantic near the ship,
which was 1000 miles from Britain, traveling
toward Britain at 32 miles per hour. If the
Hercules aircraft could average 300 miles per hour, how long would the passengers have to wait
for help to arrive? We learn the answer in Example 6, using the methods of this section.

Objective 1

Solving Applied Problems
Practical problems are often introduced through verbal descriptions. Frequently, they describe
a situation, perhaps in a physical or financial setting, and ask for a value for some specific
quantity that will favorably resolve the situation. The process of translating a practical problem into a mathematical one is called mathematical modeling. Generally, we use variables
to represent the quantities identified in the verbal description and represent relationships
between these quantities with algebraic expressions or equations. Ideally, we reduce the
problem to an equation that, when solved, also solves the practical problem. Then we solve
the equation and check our result against the practical situation presented in the problem.
Here is a general strategy for solving applied problems.
Procedure for Solving Applied Problems
Step 1

Step 2

Step 3
Step 4
Step 5
Step 6

Read the problem as many times as needed to understand it thoroughly.
Pay close attention to the question asked to help you identify the quantity
the variable should represent.
Assign a variable to represent the quantity you are seeking and, when
necessary, express all other unknown quantities in terms of this
variable. Frequently, it is helpful to draw a diagram to illustrate the
problem or to set up a table to organize the information.
Write an equation (the model) that describes the situation. Look for a
relationship between the unknown quantities in Step 2.
Solve the equation.
Answer the question asked in the problem.
Check the answer against the description of the original problem (not just
the equation solved in Step 4).

Section 1.2 Applications of Linear Equations: Modeling

EXAMPLE 1

91

Modeling a Pre-sale Price

A sports complex is offering a fall semester fitness program to all college freshmen at a
20% discount. If the discounted price is $144, what was the original price?
Solution
Step 2 Let x = the original price.
This is the amount you want to find.
Then the discounted price is the original price minus 20%, or x − 0.2 x.
Step 3

So x − 0.2 x = 144.

Step 4 		

0.8 x = 144
x = 180

Discounted price = $144
x − 0.2 x = ( 1 − 0.2 ) x = 0.8 x
Divide both sides by 0.8,

144
= 180.
0.8

Step 5

The original price of the fitness program was $180.

Step 6

Check If the original price was $180, because 20% of $180 is $36, we have
$180 minus $36, or $144.

Practice Problem 1. A bookstore is selling a backpack at a 15% discount. If the
discounted price is $29.75, what was the original price?

Objective 2

Geometry
Common geometric figures and formulas are given on the final pages of the text.
EXAMPLE 2

Modeling a Geometry Problem

The length of a rectangular soccer field is 30 yards less than twice its width. Find the
dimensions of the field assuming that its perimeter is 360 yards.
Solution
Step 2 Let
x = the width of the field.
Then 2 x − 30 = the length of the field. (See the following figure.)
2x 2 30
x

x

2x 2 30

Step 3

Perimeter = sum of the lengths of the four sides of the rectangle
= ( 2 x − 30 ) + x + ( 2 x − 30 ) + x
Perimeter = 360 ft

Given

( 2 x − 30 ) + x + ( 2 x − 30 ) + x = 360

Replace the verbal description
of perimeter with the algebraic
expression.

Step 4 		

Combine terms.

6 x − 60 = 360
6 x = 420
420
x =
= 70
6

Add 60 to both sides and simplify.
Divide each side by 6.

Step 5

The width of the field = 70 yards, and
the length of the field = 2 ( 70 ) − 30 = 140 − 30 = 110 yards.
The dimensions of the soccer field are 110 by 70 yards.

Step 6

Check The perimeter is 110 + 70 + 110 + 70 = 360 yards.

Practice Problem 2. The length of a rectangle is 5 m more than twice its width.
Find the dimensions of the rectangle, assuming that its perimeter is 28 m.

92

Chapter 1 Equations and Inequalities

Finance
EXAMPLE 3

Modeling an Investment Problem

Tyrick invests $15,000, some in stocks and the rest in bonds. If he invests twice as much in
stocks as he does in bonds, how much does he invest in each?
Solution
Step 2 Let x = the amount invested in stocks. The rest of the $15,000 investment
( 15, 000 − x ) is invested in bonds.
Step 3 We have one more important piece of information to use, as follows:
Amount invested in stocks, x =
x = 2( 15, 000 − x ).

Replace the verbal descriptions
with algebraic expressions.

x = 30, 000 − 2 x

Distributive property

3 x = 30, 000

Add 2 x to both sides.

x = 10, 000

Divide both sides by 3.

Step 4 		

Step 5
Step 6

Twice the amount invested
in bonds, 2 ( 15, 000 − x )

Tyrick invests $10,000 in stocks and $15, 000 − $10, 000 = $5000 in bonds.
Check in the original problem. If Tyrick invests $10,000 in stocks and $5000 in
bonds, then because 2 ( $5000 ) = $10, 000, he invested twice as much in
stocks as he did in bonds.

Practice Problem 3. Repeat Example 3, but Tyrick now invests three times as much in
stocks as he does in bonds.
Interest is money paid for the use of borrowed money. For example, while your money
is on deposit at a bank, the bank pays you for the right to use the money in your account.
The money you are paid by the bank is interest on your deposit. On any loan, the money
borrowed for use (and on which interest is paid) is called the principal. The interest rate
is the percent of the principal charged for its use for a specific time period. The most
straightforward type of interest computation is described next.
Simple Interest
If a principal of P dollars is borrowed for a period of t years with interest rate r (expressed
as a decimal) computed yearly, then the total interest paid at the end of t years is
I = Prt.
Interest computed with this formula is called simple interest.
When interest is computed yearly, the rate r is called an annual interest rate
(or per annum interest rate).

EXAMPLE 4

Modeling a Simple Interest Problem

Ms. Sharpy invests a total of $10,000 in blue-chip and technology stocks. At the end of a year,
the blue chips returned 12% and the technology stocks returned 8% on the original investments. How much was invested in each type of stock if the total interest earned was $1060?
Solution
Step 1 We are asked to find two amounts: that invested in blue-chip stocks and that
invested in technology stocks. If we know how much was invested in blue-chip
stocks, then we know that the rest of the $10,000 was invested in technology
stocks.

Section 1.2 Applications of Linear Equations: Modeling

Step 2

93

Let x = amount invested in blue-chip stocks. Then
10, 000 − x = amount invested in technology stocks.

Step 3

We organize our information in the following table.
Investment

Principal P

Rate r

Time t

Interest I = Prt

Blue Chip
Technology

x

0.12
0.08

1
1

0.12 x
0.08( 10, 000 − x )

10, 000 − x

Interest from blue chip + Interest from technology = Total interest
Step 4

0.12 x + 0.08( 10, 000 − x ) = 1060
12 x + 8( 10, 000 − x ) = 106, 000
12 x + 80, 000 − 8 x = 106, 000

Replace descriptions with
algebraic expressions.
Multiply by 100 to
eliminate decimals.
Distributive property

4 x = 26, 000

Combine like terms;
subtract 80,000 from
both sides.

x = 6500

Divide by 4 to get the
amount in blue-chip
stocks.
Replace x with 6500.

10, 000 − x = 10, 000 − 6500
= 3500

Substitute to get the
amount in technology
stocks.

Step 5

Ms. Sharpy invests $3500 in technology stocks and $6500 in blue-chip stocks.

Step 6

Check in the original problem.
12% of $6500 is 0.12 ( 6500 ) = $780
and 8% of $3500 is 0.08( 3500 ) = $280.
Thus, the total interest earned is $780 + $280 = $1060.

Practice Problem 4. One-fifth of my capital is invested at 5%, one-sixth of my capital
at 8%, and the rest at 10% per year. If the annual interest on my capital is $130, what is
my capital?

Uniform Motion

60
= 30 miles per hour. If you
2
multiply your average speed for the trip (30 miles per hour) by the time elapsed (two
hours), you get the distance driven, 60 miles ( 60 = 2 ⋅ 30 ). When “rate” refers to the
average speed of an object, use the following formula.

If you drive 60 miles in two hours, your average speed is

Uniform Motion
If an object moves at a rate (average speed) r per unit time, then the distance d
traveled in time t units is
d = rt.

94

Chapter 1 Equations and Inequalities
WARNING

Care must be taken to make sure that units of measurement are consistent. If, for example, the
rate is given in miles per hour, then the time should be given in hours. If the rate is given in miles
per hour and the time is given as 15 minutes, change 15 minutes to 1 hour before using the
4
uniform-motion formula.

EXAMPLE 5

Modeling a Uniform-Motion Problem

A motorcycle police officer is chasing a car that is speeding at 70 miles per hour. The
police officer is 1 mile behind the car and is traveling 80 miles per hour. How long will it
be before the officer overtakes the car?
Solution
Step 2 We are asked to find the amount of time before the officer overtakes the car.
Draw a sketch to help visualize the problem. See Figure 1.1.

Interception point

1 mi

x mi

Figure 1.1

Let t = the time it takes the officer to overtake the car. Organize the information in a table.
Object

r (miles per hour)

t (hours)

d = rt (miles)

70
80

t
t

70t
80t

Car
Motorcycle
Step 3

Because the distance the motorcycle travels is 1 mile more than the car travels,
we have
80t = 70t + 1

Step 4

80t − 70t = 1
10t = 1
1
t =
10

The motorcycle’s distance is 1 mile more than the
car’s distance.
Subtract 70t from both sides.
Simplify.
Divide both sides by 10.

Step 5

The time required to overtake the car is
1
t =
hour = 0.1 hour ( or 6 minutes ).
10

Step 6

Check in the original problem. If the police officer travels for 0.1 of an hour
at 80 miles per hour, he travels d = ( 80 )( 0.1 ) = 8 miles. The car traveling
for this same 0.1 of an hour at 70 miles per hour travels ( 70 )( 0.1 ) = 7 miles.
Because the officer travels 1 more mile during that time than the car does (the
motorcycle started 1 mile behind the car), the officer does overtake the car.

Practice Problem 5. A train 130 meters long crosses a bridge in 21 seconds. The train is
traveling at 25 meters per second. What is the length of the bridge?

Section 1.2 Applications of Linear Equations: Modeling

EXAMPLE 6

95

Dealing with a Bomb Threat on the Queen Elizabeth II

In the introduction to this section, the Queen Elizabeth II was 1000 miles from Britain,
traveling toward Britain at 32 miles per hour. A Hercules aircraft was flying from Britain
directly toward the ship, averaging 300 miles per hour. How long would the passengers
have to wait for the aircraft to meet the ship?
Solution
Step 1 The initial separation between the ship and the aircraft is 1000 miles.
Step 2 Let t = time elapsed when ship and aircraft meet.
Then 32t = distance the ship traveled and 300t = distance the aircraft traveled.
Step 3
Distance the ship traveled + Distance the aircraft traveled = 1000 miles
32t + 300t = 1000
Step 4 		

Step 5

332t = 1000
1000
t =
≈ 3.01
332

Replace descriptions with algebraic
expressions.
Combine like terms.
Divide both sides by 332.

The aircraft and ship meet after about three hours.

Practice Problem 6. How long would it take for the aircraft and ship in Example 6
to meet if the aircraft averaged 350 miles per hour and was 955 miles away?

Work Rate
Work-rate problems use an idea much like that of uniform motion. In problems involving
rates of work, we assume that the work is done at a uniform rate.
Work Rate
The portion of a job completed per unit of time is called the rate of work.
If a job can be completed in x units of time (seconds, hours, days, and so on), then
the portion of the job completed in one unit of time (1 second, 1 hour, 1 day, and so on)
1
is . The portion of the job completed in t units of time (t seconds, t hours, t days, and so
x
1
on) is t ⋅ . When the portion of the job completed is 1, the job is done.
x
EXAMPLE 7

Modeling a Work-Rate Problem

One copy machine copies twice as fast as another. If both copiers work together, they can finish
a particular job in two hours. How long would it take each copier, working alone, to do the job?
Solution
Step 1 Because the speed of one copier is twice the speed of the other, if we find how
long it takes the faster copier to do the job working alone, the slower copier will
take twice as long.
Step 2 Let x = number of hours for the faster copier to complete the job alone.
2 x = number of hours for the slower copier to complete the job alone.
1
= portion of the job the faster copier does in one hour.
x
1
= portion of the job the slower copier does in one hour.
2x

96

Chapter 1 Equations and Inequalities

The time it takes both copiers, working together, to do the job is two hours. Multiplying the portion of the job each copier does in one hour by 2 will give the portion
of the completed job done by each copier. We organize our information in a table.
Portion Done
in One Hour

Time to Complete
Job Working Together

Portion Done
by Each Copier

Faster copier

1
x

2

2

Slower copier

1
2x

2

2

( 1x ) = 2x

( 21x ) = 1x

Because the job is completed in two hours, the sum of the portion of the
job completed by the faster copier in two hours and the portion of the job
completed by the slower copier in two hours is 1. The model equation can now
be written and solved.
Step 3

2
1
+ = 1
x
x

Step 4

2+ 1 = x
Multiply both sides by x.
3 = x
The faster copier could complete the job, working alone, in three hours. The
slower copier would require 2 ( 3 ) = 6 hours to complete the job.
1
Check in the original problem. The faster copier completes of the job in one
3
1
hour. Similarly, the slower copier completes of the job in one hour.
6
1
2
So, in two hours, the faster copier has completed 2
= of the job
3
3
1
2
1
and the slower copier has completed 2
=
= of the job. Because
6
6
3
2
1
+ = 1, the copiers have completed the job in two hours.
3
3

Step 5
Step 6

Faster copier portion + slower copier portion = 1.

( )

( )

Practice Problem 7. A couple took turns washing their sports car on weekends. Jim
could usually wash the car in 45 minutes, whereas Anita took 30 minutes to do the same
job. One weekend they were in a hurry to go to a party, so they worked together. How long
did it take them?

Mixtures
Mixture problems require combining various ingredients, such as water and antifreeze, to
produce a blend with specific characteristics.
EXAMPLE 8

Modeling a Mixture Problem

A full 6-quart radiator contains 75% water and 25% pure antifreeze. How much of this
mixture should be drained and replaced by pure antifreeze so that the resulting 6-quart
mixture is 50% pure antifreeze?
Solution
Step 1 We are asked to find the quantity of the radiator mixture that should be drained
and replaced by pure antifreeze. The mixture we drain is only 25% pure
antifreeze, but it is replaced with 100% pure antifreeze.
Step 2 Because we want to find the quantity of mixture drained, let
x = number of quarts of mixture drained.
Then x = number of quarts of pure antifreeze added and
0.25 x = number of quarts of pure antifreeze drained.

Section 1.2 Applications of Linear Equations: Modeling

97

Now we track the pure antifreeze.
Pure antifreeze
Pure
Pure antifreeze
Pure antifreeze in
=
− drained from
+ antifreeze
original mixture
in final mixture
original mixture
added
( 50% of 6 )

Step 3

Step 6

( 25% of 6 )

−

( 0.5 )( 6 ) = ( 0.25 )( 6 ) − 0.25 x + x

Step 4 		

Step 5

=

3 = 1.5 + 0.75 x
1.5 = 0.75 x
2 = x

( 25% of x )

+

x

Replace descriptions with algebraic
expressions.

Collect like terms; combine constants.
Subtract 1.5 from both sides.
Divide both sides by 0.75.

Drain 2 quarts of mixture from the radiator.
Check in the original problem. Draining 2 quarts from the original 6 quarts
leaves 4 quarts of mixture in the radiator. This mixture consists of 1 quart of
pure antifreeze (25%) and 3 quarts of water (75%). Adding 2 quarts of antifreeze to the radiator produces 3 quarts of antifreeze mixed with 3 quarts of
water. This is the desired 50% pure antifreeze solution.

Practice Problem 8. How many gallons of 40% sulfuric acid solution should be mixed
with 20% sulfuric acid solution to obtain 50 gallons of 25% sulfuric acid solution?

1.2

Exercises

Videos for
select exercises

Concepts and Vocabulary
1. If the sides of a rectangle are a and b units, the perimeter of
the rectangle is
units.
2. The formula for simple interest is I = Prt, where
P =
,r =
, and
t =
.
3. The distance d traveled by an object moving at rate r for time
t is given by d =
.
4. The portion of a job completed per unit of time is called
the
.
5. True or False. After a 30% discount the price of a bike is
$238. The original price can be found by solving the equation
0.3 x = 238.
6. True or False. If your first two test scores are 77 and 81, to
find the score needed on a third test to achieve an average of
80, you can solve the equation
77 + 81 + x
= 80.
3
7. True or False. If $100 is invested at 5% for three years, the
interest I = ( 100 )( 5 )( 3 ) dollars.
8. True or False. If an object is traveling at a uniform rate
of 60 ft / sec, the distance covered in 15 minutes is
d = ( 60 )( 15 ) ft.

Building Skills
In Exercises 9–18, write an algebraic expression for the
specified quantity.
9. Desmond buys in-line skates for $327.62, including sales tax
of 6 12 %. Let x = the price of in-line skates before tax. Write
an algebraic expression in x for “the tax paid on the in-line
skates.”
10. A lamp manufacturing company produces 1600 reading
lamps a day when it operates in two shifts. The first shift
produces only 5/6 as many lamps as the second shift. Let
x = the number of lamps produced per day by the second
shift. Write an algebraic expression in x for the number of
lamps produced per day by the first shift.

98

Chapter 1 Equations and Inequalities

11. Kim invests $22,000, some in stocks and the rest in
bonds. Let x = amount invested in stocks. Write an
algebraic expression in x for “the amount invested in
bonds.”
12. An air conditioning repair bill for $229.50 showed a charge
of $72.00 for parts, with the remainder of the charge for
labor. Let x = number of hours of labor it took to repair the
air conditioner. Write an algebraic expression in x for the
labor charge per hour.
13. Natasha can pick an eight-tree section of orange trees in four
hours working alone. It takes her brother five hours to pick
the same section working alone.
Let t = amount of time it takes Natasha and her brother
to pick the eight-tree section working together. Write an
algebraic expression in t for
a. the portion of the job completed by Natasha in t hours.
b. the portion of the job completed by Natasha’s
brother in t hours.
14. Jermaine can process a batch of tax forms in three hours
working alone. Ralph can process a batch of tax forms in two
hours working alone.
Let t = amount of time it takes Jermaine and Ralph to
process a batch of tax forms working together. Write an algebraic expression in t for
a. the portion of the batch of tax forms completed by
Jermaine in t hours.
b. the portion of the batch of tax forms completed by
Ralph in t hours.
15. Walnuts sell for $7.40 per pound, and raisins sell for
$4.60 per pound. Let x = number of pounds of raisins in a
10-pound mixture of walnuts and raisins. Write an algebraic
expression in x for
a. the number of pounds of walnuts in the 10-pound
mixture.
b. the value of the raisins in the 10-pound mixture.
c. the value of the walnuts in the 10-pound mixture.
16. Dried pears sell for $5.50 per pound, and dried apricots sell
for $6.25 per pound. Let x = number of pounds of dried pears
in a 15-pound mixture of dried pears and dried apricots.
Write an algebraic expression in x for
a. the number of pounds of dried apricots in the
15-pound mixture.
b. the value of the dried apricots in the 15-pound
mixture.
c. the value of the dried pears in the 15-pound mixture.
17. A pharmacist has 8 liters of a mixture that is 10% alcohol. To
strengthen the mixture, the pharmacist adds pure alcohol.
Let x = number of liters of pure alcohol added to the
8-liter mixture. Write an algebraic expression in x for
a. the number of liters of mixture the pharmacist has after the
pure alcohol is added.
b. the number of liters of alcohol in the mixture obtained by adding the pure alcohol to the original 8-liter mixture.
18. A gallon of a 25% saline solution is to be diluted by adding
distilled water to it. Let x = number of gallons of distilled
water added to the gallon of 25% saline solution. Write an
algebraic expression in x for
a. the number of gallons of saline solution after the distilled
water is added.
b. the percent saline solution obtained by adding the distilled
water to the original 25% solution.

Applying the Concepts
In Exercises 19–70, use mathematical modeling techniques to
solve the problems.
19. Pre-sale pricing. A computer is on sale for $1192. If the
original price was reduced by 20%, what was the original
price of the computer?
20. Pre-sale pricing. A pair of sneakers is on sale for $68. If
the original price was reduced by 15%, what was the original
price of the sneakers?
21. Test scores. Kylee’s first three test scores are 81, 75,
and 77. What must Kylee score on the next test to raise the
average to 80?
22. Test scores. Jocelyn’s first three test scores are 85, 76, and
88. If the final exam counts as two tests, what must Jocelyn
score on the final exam to raise her average to 85?
23. Geometry. The perimeter of a rectangle is 80 ft. Find its
dimensions, assuming that its length is 5 ft less than twice
its width.
24. Geometry. The width of a rectangle is 3 ft more than
one-half its length, and the perimeter of the rectangle is 36 ft.
Find its dimensions.
25. Investment. If P dollars are invested at a simple interest
rate r (in decimals), the amount A that will be available after
t years is
A = P + Prt.
		 If $500 is invested at a rate of 6%, how long will it be
before the amount of money available is $920?
[Hint: Use r = 0.06.]
26. Investment. Using the formula from Exercise 25, determine
the amount of money that was invested, assuming that $2482
resulted from a 10-year investment at 7%.
27. Estimating a mortgage note. A rule of thumb for estimating the maximum affordable monthly mortgage note M for
prospective homeowners is
M =

m−b
,
4

		where m is the gross monthly income and b is the total of the
monthly bills. What must the gross monthly income be to justify a monthly note of $427 if monthly bills are $302?
28. Engineering degrees. Among a group of engineers who
had received master’s degrees, the annual salary S in dollars
was related to two numbers b and a, where
b = the number of years of work experience before
receiving the degree and
a = the number of years of work experience after
receiving the degree.
The relationship between S, a, and b is given by
S = 48,917 + 1080 b + 1604 a.
If an engineer had worked eight years before earning her
master’s degree and was earning $67,181, how many years
did she work after receiving her degree?
29. Digital cameras. The price P (in dollars) for which a manufacturer will sell a digital camera is related to the number q
of cameras ordered by the formula
P = 200 − 0.02q, for 100 ≤ q ≤ 2000.

Section 1.2 Applications of Linear Equations: Modeling
How many cameras must be ordered for a retailer to pay
$170 per camera?

99

and the savings and loan returned 8% on the investment. Find
the amount invested in each assuming that the agent’s total
income from the investments was $448.
39. Tax shelter. Mr. Mostafa received an inheritance of $7000.
He put part of it in a tax shelter paying 9% interest and part
in a bank paying 6%. If his annual interest totals $540, how
much did he invest at each rate?
40. Interest. Ms. Jordan invested $4900, part at 6% interest and
the rest at 8%. If the yearly interest on each investment is the
same, how much interest does she receive at the end of the
year?
41. Interest. If $5000 is invested in a bank that pays 5%
interest, how much more must be invested in bonds at 8%
to earn 6% on the total investment?

30. Boyle’s Law. If a volume V1 of a dry gas under pressure P1 is
subjected to a new pressure P2 , the new volume V2 of the gas
is given by
V2 =

V1 P1
.
P2

Assuming that V2 is 200 cubic centimeters, V1 is 600 cubic
centimeters, and P1 is 400 millimeters of mercury, find P2 .
31. Chain store properties. A fast-food chain bought two
pieces of land for new stores. The more expensive piece of
land costs $23,000 more than the less expensive piece of
land, and the two pieces together cost $147,000. How much
did each piece cost?
32. Administrative salaries. The manager at a wholesale outlet
earns $450 more per month than the assistant manager. If their
combined salary is $3700 per month, what is the monthly
salary of each?
33. Lottery ticket sales. The lottery ticket sales at Quick Mart
for August were 10% above the sales for July. If Quick Mart
sold a total of 1113 lottery tickets during July and August,
how many tickets were sold each month?
34. Sales commission. Jan’s commission for February was
$15 more than half her commission for March, and her total
commission for the two months was $633. Find her commission for each month.
35. Inheritance. An estate valued at $225,000 is to be divided
between two sons so that the older son receives four times as
much as the younger son. Find each son’s share of the
estate.
36. TV game show. Kevin won $735,000 on a TV game show.
He decided to keep a certain amount for himself, give onehalf the amount he kept for himself to his daughter, and give
one-fourth the amount he kept for himself to his dad. How
much did each person get?
37. Grades. Your grades in the three tests in College Algebra
are 87, 59, and 73.
a. How many points do you need on the final to average 75?
Assume the final is weighted the same as any of the other
tests.
b. Find part (a), assuming that the final carries double
weight.
38. Real estate investment. A real estate agent invested a total
of $4200. Part was invested in a high-risk real-estate venture,
and the rest was invested in a savings and loan. At the end of
a year, the high-risk venture returned 15% on the investment

42. Retail profit. A retailer’s cost for a microwave oven is
$480. If he wants to make a profit of 20% of the selling price,
at what price should the oven be sold?
43. Profit from sales. The Beckly Company manufactures
shaving sets for $3 each and sells them for $5 each. How
many shaving sets must be sold for the company to recover
an initial investment of $40,000 and earn an additional
$30,000 as profit?
44. Jogging. Angelina jogs 400 meters in the same time that
Harry bicycles 600 meters. If Harry bicycles 60 meters
per minute faster than Angelina jogs, find the rate of
each.
45. Overtaking a lead. A car leaves New Orleans traveling
50 kilometers per hour. An hour later a second car leaves
New Orleans following the first car, traveling 70 kilometers
per hour. How many hours after leaving New Orleans will it
take the second car to overtake the first?
46. Overtaking a lead. Karen notices that her husband left for
the airport without his briefcase. Her husband drives 40 miles
per hour and has a 15-minute head start. If Karen (with the briefcase) drives 60 miles per hour and the airport is 45 miles away,
will she catch her husband before he arrives at the airport?
47. Separating planes. Two planes leave an airport traveling in
opposite directions. One plane travels at 470 kilometers per
hour and the other at 430 kilometers per hour. How long will
it take them to be 2250 kilometers apart?
48. Overtaking a bike. Lucas is 1/3 of a mile from home,
bicycling at 20 miles per hour, when his brother leaves home
on his bike to catch up. How fast must Lucas’s brother go to
catch Lucas a mile from home?
49. Increasing distances. Two cars start out together from the
same place. They travel in opposite directions, with one of
them traveling 7 miles per hour faster than the other. After
three hours, they are 621 miles apart. How fast is each car
traveling?
50. Travel time. Aya rode her bicycle from her house to a friend’s
house, averaging 16 kilometers per hour. It turned dark before
she was ready to return home, so her friend drove her home at
a rate of 80 kilometers per hour. If Aya’s total traveling time
was three hours, how far away did her friend live?
51. Draining a pool. An old pump can drain a pool in six hours
working alone. A new pump can drain the pool in four hours
working alone. How long will it take both pumps to empty
the pool working together?

100

Chapter 1 Equations and Inequalities

52. Draining a pool. A swimming pool has two drain pipes.
One pipe can empty the pool in three hours, and the other
pipe can empty the pool in seven hours. If both drains are
open, how long will it take the pool to drain?
53. Filling a blimp. One type of air blower can fill a blimp (or
dirigible) in six hours working alone, while a second blower
fills the same blimp in nine hours working alone. Working
together, how long will it take both blowers to fill the
blimp?
54. Shredding hay. A shredder distributes hay across 5/9 of
a field in ten hours working alone. With the addition of a
second shredder, the entire field is finished in another three
hours. How long would it take the second shredder to do the
job working alone?
55. Sorting letters. A new letter sorting machine works twice
as fast as the old one. Both sorters working together complete
a job in eight hours. How long would it have taken the new
letter sorter to do the job alone?
56. Plowing a field. A farmer can plow his field by himself in
15 days. If his son helps, they can do it in 6 days. How long
would it take his son to plow the field by himself?

If the box contains a total of $96.25, how many coins of each
kind does it contain?
66. Gumdrops. In a jar of red and green gumdrops, 12 more
than half the gumdrops are red and the number of green
gumdrops is 19 more than half the number of red gumdrops.
How many of each color are in the jar?
67. Age computation. Eric’s grandfather is 57 years older
than Eric. Five years from now, Eric’s grandfather will be
4 times as old as Eric is at that time. How old is Eric’s
grandfather?
68. Real estate investment. A real estate investor bought
acreage for $7200. After reselling three-fourths of the acreage
at a profit of $30 per acre, she recovered the $7200. How
many acres did she sell?
69. Box construction. An open box is to be constructed from a
rectangular sheet of tin 3 meters wide by cutting out a
1-meter square from each corner and folding up the sides.
The volume of the box is to be 2 cubic meters. What is the
length of the tin rectangle?
1m

57. Job completion. Suppose an average professor can do a
certain job in nine hours and an average student can do the
same job in six hours. If three professors and two students
work together, how long will the job take?

3m

58. Butterfat in milk. Two gallons of milk contain 2% butterfat.
How many quarts of milk should be drained and replaced by
pure butterfat to produce a mixture of 2 gallons of milk containing 5% butterfat? (There are 4 quarts in a gallon.)
59. Gold alloy. A goldsmith has 120 grams of a gold alloy (a
mixture of gold and one or more other metals) containing
75% pure gold. How much pure gold must be added to this
alloy to obtain an alloy that is 80% pure gold?
60. Coffee blends. A coffee wholesaler wants to blend a
coffee containing 35% chicory with a coffee containing
15% chicory to produce a 500-kilogram blend of coffee
containing 18% chicory. How much of each type is
required?
61. Solder. How many pounds of 60-40 solder (60% tin, 40%
lead) must be mixed with 40-60 solder to produce 600 grams
of 55-45 solder?
62. Whiskey proof. How many gallons of 90 proof whiskey
(45% alcohol) must be mixed with 70 proof whiskey
(35% alcohol) to produce 36 gallons of 85 proof whiskey?
63. Pharmacy. A pharmacist needs a 20% boric acid solution.
How much 60% boric acid solution must be added to
7.5 liters of an 8% boric acid solution to get the desired
strength?
64. Mixture of nuts. A mixture of nuts contains almonds worth
$9 a pound, cashews worth $11 per pound, and pecans worth
$14 per pound. If there are three times as many pounds of
almonds as cashews in a 100-pound mixture worth $12.20
a pound, how many pounds of each nut does the mixture
contain?
65. Vending machine coins. A vending machine coin box contains nickels, dimes, and quarters. The coin box contains 3 times
as many nickels and 4 times as many quarters as it does dimes.

70. Interest rates. Mr. Kaplan invests one sum of money at
a certain rate of interest and then half that sum at twice the
first rate of interest. This turns out to yield 8% on the total
investment. What are the two rates of interest?

Beyond the Basics
You can solve many problems by modeling procedures
introduced in this section other than those presented in the
examples in the section. Here are some types for you to try.
71. Suppose you average 75 miles per hour over the first half of a
drive from Denver to Las Vegas, but your average speed for
the entire trip is 60 miles per hour. What was your average
speed for the second half of the drive?
72. Davinder (D) and Mikhail (M) were 2 miles apart when they
began walking toward each other. D walks at a constant rate
of 3.7 miles per hour, and M walks at a constant rate of
4.3 miles per hour. When they started, D’s dog, who runs at a
constant rate of 6 miles per hour, ran to M and then turned
back and ran to D. If the dog continued to run back and forth
until D and M met and the dog lost no time turning around,
how far did it run?
73. A mixture contains alcohol and water in the ratio 5:1. After
the addition of 5 liters of water, the ratio of alcohol to water
becomes 5:2. Find the quantity of alcohol in the original
mixture.
74. An alloy contains zinc and copper in the ratio 5:8, and
another alloy contains zinc and copper in the ratio 5:3. Equal
amounts of both alloys are melted together. Find the ratio of
zinc to copper in the new alloy.

Section 1.2 Applications of Linear Equations: Modeling
75. Democritus has lived

1
1
of his life as a boy, of his life as a
6
8

1
of his life as a man and has spent 15 years as a
2
mature adult. How old is Democritus?
youth, and

76. A man and a woman have the same birthday. When he was as
old as she is now, the man was twice as old as the woman.
When she becomes as old as he is now, the sum of their ages
will be 119. How old is the man now?
77. How many minutes is it before 6 p.m. if, 50 minutes ago,
four times this number was the number of minutes past
3 p.m.?
78. Two pipes A and B can fill a tank in 24 minutes and 32 minutes,
respectively. Initially, both pipes are opened simultaneously.
After how many minutes should pipe B be turned off so that
the tank is full in 18 minutes?
79. A small plane was scheduled to fly from Atlanta to
Washington, D.C. The plane flies at a constant speed of
150 miles per hour. However, the flight was against a head
wind of 10 miles per hour. The threat of mechanical failure
forced the plane to turn back, and it returned to Atlanta with a
tail wind of 10 miles per hour, landing 1.5 hours after it had
taken off.
a. How far had the plane traveled before turning back?
b. What was the plane’s average speed?
80. Three airports A, B, and C are located on an east-west line.
B is 705 miles west of A, and C is 652.5 miles west of B. A
pilot flew from A to B, had a stopover at B for three hours,
and continued to C. The wind was blowing from the east at
15 miles per hour during the first part of the trip, but the wind
changed to come from the west at 20 miles per hour during

GETTING READY

Equivalent equations (Section 1.1, page 82)
Special product formulas (Section P.3, page 36)

81. Two trains are traveling toward each other on adjacent tracks.
One of the trains is 230 feet long and is moving at a speed of
50 miles per hour. The other train is 210 feet long and is
traveling at the rate of 60 miles per hour. Find the time interval
between the moment the trains first meet until they completely
pass each other. (Remember, 1 mile = 5280 feet.)
82. Suppose you are driving from point A to point B at x miles
per hour and return from B to A at y miles per hour. What is
your average speed for the round trip?
Extend the foregoing problem: You travel along an
equilateral triangular path ABC from A to B at x miles
per hour, from B to C at y miles per hour, and from C to A
at z miles per hour. What is your average speed for the
round trip?

Critical Thinking / Discussion / Writing
83. A pawnshop owner sells two watches for $499 each. On one
watch, he gained 10%, and on the other watch, he lost 10%.
What is his percentage gain or loss?
a. No loss, no gain
c. 1% loss

b. 10% loss
d. 1% gain

84. The price of gasoline increased by 20% from July to August,
while your consumption of gas decreased by 20% from July
to August. What is the percentage change in your gas bill
from July to August?
a. No change
b. 5% decrease
c. 4% increase
d. 4% decrease

Factor each quadratic trinomial. (Section P.4, pages 39–43)
In Exercises GR9–GR16, factor each of the expressions.
GR9. x 2 + x
GR10. 2 x 2 − 4 x

REVIEW SKILLS
Simplify square roots. (Section P.6, page 62)
In Exercises GR1–GR4, simplify each of the expressions.
GR1.

8

GR2.

27

GR3.

12

GR4.

45

Simplify radical expressions. (Section P.6, pages 64–65)
In Exercises GR5–GR8, simplify each of the expressions.
2+3 8
3 + 18
GR5.
GR6.
2
3
15 − 75
5

the stopover. The flight time between A and B and between B
and C was the same. Find the airspeed of the plane.

for the Next Section

REVIEW CONCEPTS

GR7.

101

GR8.

35 − 14 12
7

GR11. x 2 − 4
GR12. x 2 − 25
GR13. x 2 + 4 x + 4
GR14. x 2 − 6 x + 9
GR15. x 2 − 8 x + 7
GR16. x 2 + 2 x − 15
Solve linear equations. (Section 1.1, pages 82–84)
In Exercises GR17–GR20, solve each equation.
GR17. 2 x − 7 = 5
GR18. 3 x + 8 = 2
GR19. 4 − y = 7

GR20. 1 − 2 y = −3

102

Chapter 1 Equations and Inequalities

1.3

Quadratic Equations
Objectives

Videos for
this Section

1

Solve a quadratic equation by factoring.

2

Solve a quadratic equation by the square root method.

3

Solve a quadratic equation by completing the square.

4

Solve a quadratic equation by using the quadratic formula.

5

Solve applied problems.

The Golden Rectangle
The ancient Greeks, in about the sixth century b.c., sought
unifying principles of beauty and perfection, which they
believed could be described mathematically. In their study of
beauty, the Greeks used the term golden ratio. The golden
ratio is frequently referred to as “phi,” after the Greek sculptor
Phidias, and is symbolized by the Greek letter Φ (phi). A geometric figure that is commonly associated with phi is the golden
rectangle. (See Example 12.) This rectangle has sides of lengths
a and b that are in proportion to the golden ratio. It has been
said that the golden rectangle is the most pleasing rectangle to
the eye. Numerous examples of art and architecture have
employed the golden rectangle. Here are three of them:
1. The exterior dimensions of the Parthenon in Athens, built
about 440 b.c., form a perfect golden rectangle.

The Parthenon

2. Leonardo Da Vinci called the golden ratio the “divine The Mona Lisa
proportion” and featured it in many of his paintings,
including the famous Mona Lisa. (Try drawing a rectangle around her face.)
3. The Great Pyramid of Giza is believed to be 4600 years old, a time long before the Greeks. Its
dimensions are also based on the golden ratio.
In Example 12, we show that the numerical value of the golden ratio can be found by solving
the quadratic equation x 2 − x − 1 = 0.

Quadratic Equation
A quadratic equation in the variable x is an equation equivalent to the equation
ax 2 + bx + c = 0,
The Pyramid of Giza

DO YOU KNOW?
The word quadratic comes
from the Latin quadratus,
meaning square.

where a, b, and c are real numbers and a ≠ 0.

A quadratic equation written in the form ax 2 + bx + c = 0 is said to be in standard
form. Here are some examples of quadratic equations that are not in standard form.
2 x 2 − 5x + 7 = x 2 + 3x − 1
3y 2 + 4 y + 1 = 6 y − 5
x 2 − 2x = 3

Section 1.3 Quadratic Equations

103

We discuss four methods for solving quadratic equations: (1) by factoring, (2) by taking
square roots, (3) by completing the square, and (4) by using the quadratic formula.
We begin by studying real number solutions of quadratic equations.

Objective 1

Factoring Method
Some quadratic equations in the standard form ax 2 + bx + c = 0 can be solved by
factoring and using the zero-product property.

SIDE NOTE

Zero–Product Property

To use the zero-product
property to solve an equation,
you must make sure that one
side of the equation is 0.

Let A and B be two algebraic expressions.
Then AB = 0 if and only if A = 0 or B = 0.

For a product of real numbers, a similar property was stated in Section P.1.
Factoring Trinomials of the Form x 2 + Bx + C
To factor the quadratic trinomial x 2 + Bx + C into the product ( x + a )( x + b ) we
compare the expansions:
a·b5C

(x 1 a)(x 1 b) 5 x2 1 (a 1 b) · x 1 a · b 5 x2 1 B · x 1 C.

a1b5B

Our goal is to find two integers a and b such that a ⋅ b = C and a + b = B.
Step 1
Step 2

List all pairs of integers a and b such that a ⋅ b = C.
From the list choose the pair a and b such that a + b = B.

For more detail, see page 41.

PROCEDURE IN ACTION
EXAMPLE 1

Solving a Quadratic Equation by Factoring

Objective

Example

Solve quadratic equations

Solve: x 2 − 7 x = 18.

Step 1 Write the given equation in standard
form (so that one side is 0).
Step 2 Factor the nonzero side of the
equation.

x 2 − 7 x = 18
x 2 − 7 x − 18 =

0

Original equation
Subtract 18 from both sides.

x 2 − 7 x − 18 = ( x + a )( x + b )

Set up the product.

a ⋅ b = −18 = ( ±1 ) ⋅ ( ∓18 ) = ( ±2 ) ⋅ ( ∓9 ) = ( ±3 ) ⋅ ( ∓6 )
Factors of −18
Sum of Factors

−1, 18 1, −18 −2, 9 2, −9 −3, 6 3, −6
17

−17

7

−7

3

−3

x 2 − 7 x − 18 = ( x + 2 )( x − 9 )
continued

104

Chapter 1 Equations and Inequalities

Objective

Example
( x + 2 )( x − 9 ) = 0

Step 3 Set each factor obtained in Step 2
equal to 0.
Step 4

x+2 = 0

x−9 = 0

x = −2

x = 9

Solve the resulting equations in Step 3.

Step 5 Check the solutions obtained in Step 4
in the original equation.

Factor the left side.
Zero-product property
Solve for x.

Substitute x = −2 and x = 9 into x 2 − 7 x = 18.
?

?

( − 2 ) 2 − 7 ( − 2 ) = 18

( 9 ) 2 − 7 ( 9 ) = 18

?
4 + 14 =
18

?
81 − 63 =
18

?
18 =
18
Yes

?
18 =
18
Yes

This check shows that the solution set is { −2, 9 }.
Practice Problem 1. Solve x 2 + 2 x = 24. ￼

Factoring Trinomials of the Form Ax 2 + Bx + C
To factor the quadratic trinomial Ax 2 + Bx + C into the product ( ax + b )( cx + d )
we compare the expansions:
ad · bc 5 ac · bd 5 A · C

(ax 1 b)(cx 1 d) 5 a c · x2 1 (a d 1 b c)x 1 b d 5 A · x2 1 B · x 1 C.
F
O
I
L
ad 1 bc 5 B

Our goal is to find two integer factors of the product A ⋅ C (that would be ad ⋅ bc)
whose sum ( ad + bc ) is B.
Step 1 List all pairs of integers whose product is A ⋅ C.
Step 2 From the list choose the pair whose sum is B.
Step 3 Split the term Bx according to the sum from Step 2.
Step 4 Group terms and factor out common factor.
For more detail, see page 45.

EXAMPLE 2

Solving a Quadratic Equation by Factoring

Solve by factoring: 2t 2 = 3 − 5t.
Solution
Step 1 Write the equation in standard form.
2t 2 = 3 − 5t
2t 2 + 5t

= 3

2t 2 + 5t − 3 =
Step 2

Original equation
Add 5t to both sides.

0

Subtract 3 from both sides.

Factor the left side of the equation.
Consider 2t 2 + 5t − 3. Here A ⋅ C = −6 = ( ±1 ) ⋅ ( ∓6 ) = ( ±2 ) ⋅ ( ∓3 ).
Factors of −6

−1, 6

1, −6

−2, 3

2, −3

Sum of Factors

5

−5

1

−1

Section 1.3 Quadratic Equations

105

Because the factors −1 and 6 in the first column have a sum of 5 we will split 5t as
5t = −t + 6t.
2t 2 + 5 t − 3 = 2t 2 − t + 6 t − 3
= ( 2t 2 − t ) + ( 6t − 3 )

Steps 3 and 4

5t = −t + 6t
Group terms.

= t ( 2 t − 1 ) + 3( 2 t − 1 )

Factor out common terms.

= ( 2t − 1 )( t + 3 )

Distributive property

Set each linear factor equal to 0 and solve the resulting linear equations. The
vertical line segment separates the computations leading to two solutions.

2t 2 + 5t − 3 = 0
( 2t − 1 )( t + 3 ) = 0
Factor the left side.
t+3 = 0
2t − 1 = 0
Zero-product property
t = −3 Isolate the t term on one side.
2t = 1
1
t =
t = −3 Solve for t.
2
1
Check You should check the solutions t = and t = −3 in the original equation.
2
1
The solution set is , −3 .
2

{

}

Practice Problem 2. Solve by factoring 3t 2 = 2 + 5t.
WARNING

The factoring method of solving an equation works only when one of the sides of the equation
is 0. If neither side of an equation is 0, as in ( x + 1 )( x − 3 ) = 10, we cannot know the value
of either factor. For example, we could have x + 1 = 5 and x − 3 = 2, or x + 1 = 0.1 and
x − 3 = 100. There are countless possibilities for two factors whose product is 10.

EXAMPLE 3

Solving a Quadratic Equation with One Solution

Solve by factoring: x 2 + 16 = 8 x.
Solution
Step 1 Write the equation in standard form.
x 2 + 16 = 8 x
x 2 + 16 − 8 x = 0
x 2 − 8 x + 16 = 0
Step 2

Original equation
Subtract 8 x from both sides.
Standard form

Factor the left side of the equation.
( x − 4 )( x − 4 ) = 0

Steps 3 and 4

Step 5

Perfect-square trinomial

Set each factor equal to 0 and solve each resulting equation.
x−4 = 0
x − 4 = 0 Zero-product property
x = 4
x = 4

Check the solution in the original equation.
Check x = 4 because x = 4 is the only possible solution.
x 2 + 16 = 8 x
?

( 4 ) 2 + 16 = 8 ( 4 )

Original equation
Replace x with 4.

32 = 32 ✓
Thus, 4 is the only solution of x 2 + 16 = 8 x and the solution set is { 4 } .
Practice Problem 3. Solve by factoring: x 2 − 6 x = −9. 

106

Chapter 1 Equations and Inequalities

In Example 3, because the factor ( x − 4 ) appears twice in the solution, the number 4
is called a double root, or a root of multiplicity 2, of the given equation.

Objective 2

The Square Root Method
The solutions of an equation of the type x 2 = d are obtained by the square root method.
Suppose we are interested in solving the equation x 2 = 3, which is equivalent to the equation x 2 − 3 = 0. Applying the factoring method but removing the restriction that coefficients and constants represent only integers, we have
x2 − 3 = 0
2

x2 − ( 3) = 0

3 = ( 3)

( x + 3 )( x − 3 ) = 0
x+

2

a 2 − b 2 = ( a − b )( a + b )

3 = 0

or x −

3 = 0

x = − 3

or

x =

Set each factor equal to zero.
3.

Solve for x.

Thus, the solutions of the equation x 2 = 3 are − 3 and 3. Because the solutions differ
only in sign, we use the notation ± 3 to write the two numbers 3 and − 3. Similarly, for
any nonnegative real number d, the solutions of the quadratic equation x 2 = d are ± d.
SIDE NOTE

Square Root Property

If d < 0, then the equation
u 2 = d has no real solutions.

Suppose u is any algebraic expression and d ≥ 0. If u 2 = d, then u = ± d.

EXAMPLE 4

Solving an Equation by the Square Root Method

Solve: ( x − 3) 2 = 5.
Solution
( x − 3 )2

= 5

Original equation

x−3 = ± 5

Square root property

x = 3±
The solution set is { 3 −

5, 3 +

5

Add 3 to both sides.

5 }.

Practice Problem 4. Solve: ( x + 2) 2 = 5.

Objective 3

Completing the Square
We use a method called completing the square to solve quadratic equations that cannot be
solved by factoring and are not in the correct form to use the square root method. The
method requires two steps. First, we write a given quadratic equation in the form
( x + k ) 2 = d . Then we solve the equation ( x + k ) 2 = d by the square root method.
Recall that
( x + k ) 2 = x 2 + 2kx + k 2 .
Notice that the constant term, k 2 , in the trinomial x 2 + 2 kx + k 2 is the square of one-half
2
1
the coefficient of x. That is, k 2 =  ( 2k )  .
2

Perfect-Square Trinomial
A quadratic trinomial in x with coefficient of x 2 equal to 1 is a perfect-square
trinomial if the constant term is the square of one-half the coefficient of x.
To convert the expression x 2 + bx to a perfect square, we add a constant term that results
in a perfect-square trinomial.

Section 1.3 Quadratic Equations

107

x

b
2

x2

b .x
2

Here are some examples that show the number that should be added to x 2 + bx to
create a perfect-square trinomial. Note that b may be negative.

b .x
2

(

)

b 2
2

x 2 + 6x

6

3

x 2 − 4x

−4

−2

x 2 + 3x

3

3
2

( 32 ) = 49

x 2 + 3x +

9
3 2
= x+
4
2

x2 − x

−1

1
2

( − 12 ) = 14

x2 − x +

1
1 2
= x−
4
2

−

Add

Result is x +

32 = 9
( −2 ) 2

x 2 + 6 x + 9 = ( x + 3) 2
x 2 − 4 x + 4 = ( x − 2 )2

= 4

2

2

(

)

(

)

Thus, to make x 2 + bx into a perfect square, we need to add
 1 ( coefficient of x ) 
 2


Area of unshaded portion
b b b2
5 2.25 4

Area of a square = x +

(

b
2

b
2

Figure 1.2

2

b

Area of shaded portion
5 x.x 1 b .x 1 b .x
2
2
5 x2 1 bx

b
2

( 2b )

x 2 + bx

2

2
1
b2
=  ( b )  =
2

4

so that
x 2 + bx +

b2
b 2
.
= x+
4
2

(

)

b2
We say that
was added to x 2 + bx to complete the square. See
4
Figure 1.2.

b 2
2

)

EXAMPLE 5

Solving a Quadratic Equation by Completing the Square

Solve by completing the square: x 2 + 10 x + 8 = 0.
Solution
First, isolate the constant on the right side.
x 2 + 10 x + 8 = 0
x 2 + 10 x
1
Next, add  ( 10 ) 
2


2

Original equation

= −8

Subtract 8 from both sides.

= 5 2 = 25 to both sides to complete the square on the left side.

x 2 + 10 x + 25 = −8 + 25
( x + 5)

2

x 2 + 10 x + 25 = ( x + 5 ) 2

= 17

x + 5 = ± 17
x = −5 ±
Thus, x = − 5 +

Add 25 to each side.
Square root property

17

Subtract 5 from each side.

17 or x = −5 − 17, and the solution set is {−5 +

17, −5 − 17}.

Practice Problem 5. Solve by completing the square: x 2 − 6 x + 7 = 0.
Method of Completing the Square
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3
Step 4
Step 5
Step 6

Rearrange the quadratic equation so that the terms in x 2 and x are on the
left side of the equation and the constant term is on the right side.
Ensure the coefficient of x 2 is equal to 1 by dividing both sides of the
equation by the original coefficient. (Steps 1 and 2 are interchangeable.)
Add the square of one-half the coefficient of x to both sides of the equation.
Write the equation in the form ( x + k ) 2 = d where k = one-half the
coefficient of x.
Take the square root of each side, prefixing ± to the right side.
Solve the two equations resulting from Step 5.

108

Chapter 1 Equations and Inequalities

EXAMPLE 6

Solving a Quadratic Equation by Completing the Square

Solve by completing the square: 3 x 2 − 4 x − 1 = 0.
Solution
Step 1 		

3x 2 − 4 x − 1 = 0

Note that the coefficient of x 2 is 3.

3x 2 − 4 x = 1
4
1
Step 2 		
x2 − x =
3
3
2
4
1
2 2
2
Step 3 x 2 − x + −
= + −
3
3
3
3

( )
( )
( x − 23 ) = 79
2

Step 4 		

2
7
= ±
3
9
2
7
x− = ±
3
3
x−

Step 5 		

( )

( )

2 2
1 4 2
Add  −  = −
to both sides.
2 3 
3
x2 −

( )

(

)

4
2 2
2 2
x+ −
= x−
3
3
3

7
=
9

x =

The solution set is

Divide both sides by 3.

Take the square root of both sides.

2
7
±
3
3
2± 7
x =
3

Step 6 		

Add 1 to both sides.

Add

7
7
=
3
9

2
to both sides.
3

Add fractions.

{ 2 −3 7 , 2 +3 7 }.

Practice Problem 6. Solve by completing the square: 4 x 2 − 24 x + 25 = 0.

Objective 4

The Quadratic Formula
We can generalize the method of completing the square to derive a formula that gives a
solution of any quadratic equation.
We solve a quadratic equation in standard form by completing the square.
ax 2 + bx + c = 0, a ≠ 0
Step 1 		
Step 2 		
Step 3

x2 +

ax 2 + bx = −c
c
b
x2 + x = −
a
a

Isolate the constant on the right side.
Divide both sides by a.

b 2
b
b 2
c
x+
=− +
a
2a
a
2a

( )

( )

2

( x + 2ba ) = − ac + 4ba

Step 4

2

2
2

( x + 2ba ) = b 4−a 4ac
Step 6
x+

b
b 2 − 4 ac
= ±
2a
4a 2
Solve the equations in Step 5.
x+

b
b 2 − 4 ac
= ±
2a
4a 2
b
b 2 − 4 ac
±
x = −
2a
2a

The left side in Step 3 is a perfect
square.
Rearrange and combine fractions on
the right side.

2

2

Step 5

Add the square of one-half the
coefficient of x to both sides.

Take the square root of both sides.

Equations from Step 5
Add −

b
to both sides;
2a

4a 2 =

4 a2 = 2 a .

b
b 2 − 4 ac
±
± 2 a = ±2a because a = a or a = −a.
2a
2a
−b ± b 2 − 4 ac
Combine fractions.
x =
2a
The last equation in Step 6 is called the quadratic formula.
x = −

Section 1.3 Quadratic Equations
SIDE NOTE

109

Quadratic Formula

The quadratic formula shows
that a quadratic equation can
have, at most, two distinct
solutions, and for any solution
to be real we must have
b 2 − 4 ac ≥ 0.
WARNING

The solutions of the quadratic equation in the standard form ax 2 + bx + c = 0
with a ≠ 0 are given by the formula
−b ±

x =

b 2 − 4 ac
.
2a

To use the quadratic formula, write the given quadratic equation in standard form. Then determine the values of a (coefficient of x 2 ), b (coefficient of x), and c (constant term).

EXAMPLE 7

Solving a Quadratic Equation by Using the Quadratic Formula

Solve by using the quadratic formula: 3 x 2 = 5 x + 2.
Solution
The equation 3 x 2 = 5 x + 2 must be rewritten in the standard form.
3x 2 − 5x − 2 = 0

Subtract 5 x + 2 from both sides of 3 x 2 = 5 x + 2.

3 x 2 + ( −5 ) x + ( −2 ) = 0
↑
↑
↑
b
c
a

Identify values of a, b, and c to be used in the
quadratic formula.

Then a = 3, b = −5, and c = −2, and we have
b 2 − 4 ac
2a
−( −5 ) ± ( −5 ) 2 − 4 ( 3 )( −2 )
x=
2( 3 )
x=

−b ±

25 + 24
6
5 ± 49
5±7
.
=
=
6
6
=

5±

Quadratic formula
Substitute 3 for a, −5
for b, and −2 for c.
Simplify.
Simplify.

Then
x =

{

}

5+7
12
5−7
−2
1
1
=
= 2 or x =
=
= − , and the solution set is − , 2 .
6
6
6
6
3
3

Now you should solve 3 x 2 = 5 x + 2 by factoring to confirm that you get the same result.
Practice Problem 7. Solve 6 x 2 − x − 2 = 0 by using the quadratic formula.
We can also use the method of completing the square to factor any quadratic trinomial
ax 2 + bx + c by modifying the steps on page 108.

(

ax 2 + bx + c = a x 2 +
= a

(

b
c
x+
a
a

b
x2 + x +
a

)

Factor out a.

( ) ( )

c
b 2
b 2
−
+
2a
2a
a

) (

( 2ba )

2

) to complete the square.

)

Add and subtract


b 2 − 4 ac 
b 2
b 2
b 2
2 + bx+
x
x
=
+
= a  x +
−



2a
4a 2
a
2a
2a
2
If b − 4 ac < 0, the trinomial is irreducible. Otherwise, we have
2

2
b 2  b 2 − 4 ac  
If A is positive, A = ( A ) .
a  x +
− 
 

 
2a
2 a


(

(

( )

(

)

)


b
b
b 2 − 4 ac 
= a  x +
−
+
 x +


2a
2a
2a
= a ( x − r )( x − s ),

b 2 + 4 ac 


2a

where r and s are solutions to ax 2 + bx + c = 0.

A 2 − B 2 = ( A − B )( A + B )

110

Chapter 1 Equations and Inequalities

EXAMPLE 8

Solve by Factoring Using the Complete the Square Method

Solve by factoring: x 2 − 4 x + 1 = 0.
Solution
2
1
To complete x 2 − 4 ⋅ x to a perfect square add ( −4 ) = 2 2 = 4.
2

(

)

x 2 − 4x + 1 =
= x 2 − 4x + ( 4 − 4 ) + 1
= ( x 2 − 4x + 4 ) − 4 + 1

Original trinomial
Add and subtract 4.
Regroup.
A 2 + 2 AB + B 2 = ( A + B ) 2

= ( x − 2 )2 − 3
= ( x − 2 )2 − ( 3 )

2

3 = ( 3)

= (x − 2 −

3 )( x − 2 +

3)

= ( x − (2 +

3 ) )( x − ( 2 −

2

A 2 − B 2 = ( A − B )( A + B )
3 ))

To solve x 2 − 4 x + 1 = 0 we use the zero-product property.
x 2 − 4x + 1 = 0

( x − ( 2 + 3 ) )( x − ( 2 − 3 ) ) = 0
x − (2 + 3) = 0
x − (2 − 3) = 0
x = 2+

3

x = 2−

3

Original equation
Factor the left side.
Zero-product property
Solve for x.

Practice Problem 8. Solve by factoring: x 2 + 6 x + 4 = 0.

The Discriminant
The expression b 2 − 4 ac , under the radical in the quadratic formula, is called the
discriminant. If the coefficients a, b, and c are all integers, the number and type of solutions
of ax 2 + bx + c = 0 are determined by the value of the discriminant.

Solutions of ax 2 + bx + c = 0, Where a, b, and c are All Integers
Discriminant

Number of Real Solutions Type of Solutions

Positive, perfect square
Positive, but not a perfect square
Zero
Negative

Two
Two
One—a double root
None

EXAMPLE 9

Rational
Irrational
Rational
No real solutions

Using the Discriminant

Evaluate the discriminant for each equation. Then use the discriminant to determine the
number and type of solutions.
a. 2 x 2 − 3 x − 7 = 0
b. x 2 + 9 = −6 x
c. x 2 = −2 x − 3
Solution
a. For 2 x 2 − 3 x − 7 = 0, we have a = 2, b = −3, and c = −7, so
b 2 − 4 ac = ( −3 ) 2 − 4 ( 2 )( −7 ) = 65.

discriminant = 65

Because the discriminant, 65, is not a perfect square, there are two distinct irrational
solutions.

Section 1.3 Quadratic Equations

111

b. First, rewrite x 2 + 9 = −6 x in standard form: x 2 + 6 x + 9 = 0. Then,
a = 1, b = 6, and c = 9, so b 2 − 4 ac = (6) 2 − 4 ( 1 )( 9 ) = 0. discriminant = 0
Because the discriminant is zero there is only one rational solution.
c. First, rewrite x 2 = −2 x − 3 in standard form: x 2 + 2 x + 3 = 0. Then, a = 1,
b = 2, and c = 3, so b 2 − 4 ac = (2) 2 − 4 ( 1 )( 3 ) = −8. discriminant = −8
Because the discriminant, −8, is negative there are no real solutions.
Practice Problem 9. Evaluate the discriminant for each equation. Then use the discriminant to determine the number and type of solutions.
a. 3 x 2 − 2 x − 5 = 0   b. x 2 + 4 = 4 x   c. 3 x 2 + 6 x = −6

Objective 5

Applications
EXAMPLE 10

Dimension of an Electronic Component

A circular lithium battery is housed in a square compartment, as shown in the figure in the
margin. If the area of the square is 90.25 sq mm, what is the radius of the battery?
Solution
Let r = battery radius.
This is the value you want to find.
Then 2r = width of the square, so (2r ) 2 = area of the square.

r

We have ( 2r ) 2 = 90.25
2r = ± 90.25 = ±9.5
r = ±4.75 mm.

Area of the square = 90.25 sq mm
Take the square root of both sides.
Divide both sides by 2.

We reject −4.75 because the radius must be positive.
The radius of the battery is 4.75 mm.
Practice Problem 10. A circular lithium battery is housed in a square compartment as in
Example 10. If the area of the battery is 64 π sq mm, find the area of the portion of the square
not covered by the battery. Round your answer to the nearest square millimeter.
EXAMPLE 11

Partitioning a Building

A rectangular building whose depth (from the front of the building) is three times its frontage is divided into two parts by a partition that is 45 feet from and parallel to the front wall.
Assuming that the rear portion of the building contains 2100 square feet, find the dimensions of the building.
Solution
In solving problems of this type, it is advisable to draw a diagram such as Figure 1.3. We let

Rear

2100 ft2

3x245

x = the frontage of the building, in feet.
Then

3 x = the depth of the building, in feet,

and 3 x − 45 = the depth of the rear portion, in feet.

3x

The area of the rear portion of the building is x ( 3 x − 45 ) square feet. This area is
2100 square feet, so
45 ft
Front
x

Figure 1.3

x ( 3 x − 45 ) = 2100
3 x 2 − 45 x = 2100
3 x 2 − 45 x − 2100 = 0
x 2 − 15 x − 700 = 0
( x − 35 )( x + 20 ) = 0
x − 35 = 0 or x + 20 = 0
x = 35

or

x = −20.

Distributive property
Subtract 2100 from both sides.
Divide both sides by 3.
Factor.
Zero-product property
Solve for x.

112

Chapter 1 Equations and Inequalities

Because the dimensions of the building are positive numbers, we reject x = −20. Thus,
x = 35
Frontage in feet
3 x = 105.

Depth in feet

Check 3 x − 45 = 3( 35 ) − 45 = 105 − 45 = 60 is the depth of the rear portion,
and the area of the rear portion is 60 ⋅ 35 = 2100 square feet.

Practice Problem 11. In Example 11, find the approximate dimensions of the building
assuming that its depth is five times its frontage.

Golden Rectangle
SIDE NOTE
Recall that two rectangles are
similar if the lengths of
corresponding sides are
proportional.

A rectangle of length p and width q, with p > q, is called a golden rectangle if you can
divide the rectangle into a square with side of length q and a smaller rectangle that is similar to the original one. See Figure 1.4. The ratio of the longer side to the shorter side of a
p
golden rectangle is called the golden ratio. In Figure 1.4, the golden ratio is .
q
Rectangle A

Square

Rectangle

S

B

q

q

p2q
p

Figure 1.4

EXAMPLE 12

Golden Rectangle

Calculating the Golden Ratio

Use the golden rectangle in Figure 1.4 to calculate the golden ratio.
Solution
The rectangle A in Figure 1.4 is a golden rectangle. This means that we can divide rectangle A into a square S and a smaller rectangle B such that
Longer side of A
Longer side of B
.
=
Shorter side of A
Shorter side of B
Thus, because rectangle B is the smaller rectangle, p − q < q, and we have
p
q
=
q
p−q
p( p − q ) = q ⋅ q
Multiply both sides by q ( p − q ); simplify.
p 2 − pq = q 2

Distributive property

2

 p 
  − p = 1
q
q
Φ2 − Φ = 1
Φ2 − Φ − 1 = 0
Φ =
=

−( − 1) ±

Divide both sides by q 2 ; simplify.
p
with Φ, the golden ratio.
q
Write in standard form, treating Φ as the variable.

Replace

( − 1 ) 2 − 4 ( 1 )( − 1 )

2( 1 )
1± 5
.
2

Substitute 1 for a and −1 for
both b and c in the quadratic
formula.
Simplify.

Section 1.3 Quadratic Equations

Because the ratio of two positive numbers is positive, we reject the negative root
Therefore, the golden ratio is
Φ =

113

1− 5
.
2

1+ 5
≈ 1.618.
2

Practice Problem 12. Find the length of a golden rectangle whose width is 36 feet.

1.3

Exercises

Videos for
select exercises

Concepts and Vocabulary
1. Any equation of the form ax 2 + bx + c = 0 with a ≠ 0 is
called a(n)
equation.

In Exercises 19–28, solve each equation by factoring.
19. x 2 − 5 x = 0
20. x 2 − 5 x + 4 = 0

2. If P ( x ), D ( x ), and Q ( x ) are polynomials and
P ( x ) = D ( x )Q ( x ), then the solutions of P ( x ) = 0 are
the solutions of Q ( x ) = 0 together with the solutions
of
= 0.

21. x 2 + 5 x = 14

22. x 2 − 11x = 12

23. x 2 = 5 x + 6

24. x = x 2 − 12

3. From the square root property, we know that if u 2 = 5, then
u =
.
4. If you complete the square in the quadratic equation
ax 2 + bx + c = 0, you get the quadratic formula for the
solutions x =
.
5. True or False. Every quadratic equation has, at most, two
distinct solutions.
6. True or False. If we are given x 2 + kx, we form a perfect
square by adding k 2 .
7. True or False. The quadratic formula can be used to solve
any quadratic equation.
8. True or False. To solve ( x + 1 )( x − 3 ) = 1, we solve
x + 1 = 0 and x − 3 = 0.

Building Skills
In Exercises 9–16, show by substitution whether the number r
is a solution of the corresponding quadratic equation.
9. x 2 + 4 x − 12 = 0; r = −6
10. x 2 − 8 x − 9 = 0; r = 9
11. 3 x 2 + 7 x − 6 = 0; r =

2
3

1
0; r = −
2
2
13. x − 4 x + 1 = 0; r = 2 − 3
12. 2 x 2 − 5 x − 3 =

16. x 2 − 6 x + 13 = 5; r = 5 −

3
2

17. Find k, assuming that x = 1 is a solution of the equation
kx 2 + x − 3 = 0.
18. Find k, assuming that x =
kx 2 + x − 3 = 0.

26. 3 x 2 = 11x + 4

27. 4 x 2 − 2 = 7 x

28. 4 x 2 − 3 = 4 x

In Exercises 29–34, solve each equation by the square root
method.
29. 3 x 2 = 48
30. 2 x 2 = 50
31. x 2 + 1 = 5

32. 2 x 2 − 1 = 17

33. ( x − 1) 2

34. (2 x − 3) 2 = 25

= 16

In Exercises 35–44, add a constant term to the expression to
convert it to a perfect square.
35. x 2 + 4 x
36. y 2 + 10 y
37. x 2 + 6 x

38. y 2 − 8 y

39. x 2

− 7x
1
41. x 2 + x
3

40. x 2 − 3 x
3
42. x 2 − x
2

43. x 2 + ax

44. x 2 −

2a
x
3

In Exercises 45–50, solve each equation by completing
the square.
45. x 2 + 2 x − 5 = 0
46. x 2 + 6 x = −7
47. x 2 − 3 x − 1 = 0

48. x 2 − x − 3 = 0

49. 2r 2 + 3r = 9

50. 3k 2 − 5k + 1 = 0

In Exercises 51–56, solve each equation by using the
quadratic formula.
51. x 2 + 2 x − 4 = 0
52. m 2 + 3m + 2 = 0

14. x 2 − 6 x + 1 = 0; r = 3 + 2 2
15. 4 x 2 − 8 x + 13 = 0; r = 2 +

= x+6

25. 2 x 2

7 is a solution of the equation

53. 6 x 2 = 7 x + 5

54. t 2 − 7 = 4t

55. 3z 2 − 2 z = 7

56. 6 y 2 + 11y = 10

In Exercises 57–60, solve each equation by factoring using
completing the square method.
57. x 2 + 8 x + 13 = 0
58. x 2 − 6 x + 4 = 0
59. 3 x 2 − 6 x − 12 = 0

60. 2 x 2 + 16 x + 18 = 0

Chapter 1 Equations and Inequalities

In Exercises 61–86, solve each equation by any method.
61. 2 x 2 + 5 x − 3 = 0
62. 2 x 2 − 9 x + 10 = 0
63. (3 x − 2) 2 − 16 = 0
65. 5 x 2 − 6 x

=

64. (4 x + 1) 2 − 25 = 0

4 x 2 + 6x − 3

66. x 2 + 7 x − 5 = x − x 2
67. 3 p 2 + 8 p + 4 = 0
69. 3 y 2

68. x 2 = 5( x − 1 )

+ 5y + 2 = 0

70. 6 x 2 + 11x + 4 = 0

71. 5 x 2 + 12 x + 4 = 0
73. 5 y 2

+ 10 y + 4 =

2y 2

72. 3 x 2 − 2 x − 5 = 0
+ 3y + 1

74. 3 x 2 − 1 = 5 x 2 − 3 x − 5

75. 2 x 2 + x = 15

= 1− x

77. 12 x 2 − 10 x = 12

76.

6x 2

78. −x 2 + 10 x + 1200 = 0

79. ( x + 13 )( x + 5 ) = −2

80. 3( x 2 + 1 ) = 2 x 2 + 4 x + 1
81. 18 x 2 − 45 x = −7
83. 2t 2

82. 18 x 2 + 57 x + 45 = 0

−5 = 0

84. 3k 2 − 48 = 0

85. 4 x 2 − 10 x − 750 = 0

86. 12 x 2 + 43 x + 36 = 0

In Exercises 87–94, evaluate the discriminant for each
equation. Then use the discriminant to determine the number
and type of solutions. Do not solve the equation.
87. x 2 + 4 x − 2 = 0
88. 2 x 2 + 18 = 12 x
89. −3 x 2 = 4

90. x 2 + 8 = 0

91. 6 x 2 − 3 x − 2 = 0

92. 12 x 2 + 5 x − 3 = 0

93. 2 x 2 − 3 x + 1 = 0

94. 4 x 2 + 3 = 10 x

96. Find the length of the golden rectangle whose width is 18.63 ft.
97. Find the width of the golden rectangle whose length is 8.46 cm.
98. Find the width of the golden rectangle whose length is 4.68 m.

Applying the Concepts
99. Dimensions. The length of a rectangular plot is three times
its width. Assuming that the area of the plot is 10,800 square
feet, find the dimensions of the plot.
100. Dimensions. The diagonal of a square tile is 4 inches longer
than its side. Find the length of the side.
101. Finding integers. Find two numbers whose sum is 28 and
whose product is 147.
102. Finding integers. Find an integer such that the sum of
twice the square of the integer and the integer itself is 55.

Plastics production (in million tonnes)

103. Plastics production. The graph below shows the global plastics production, p, in million tonnes between years 2007–2019.
390
368

350
330

335

310
290

299

270
250

260
2007

270
2010

104. Smartphone usage. The graph below shows the percent,
p, of the 12+ U.S. population who owned a smartphone in a
given year.
90
80
70

2013
2016
2019
Year
Source: PlasticsEurope Market Research Group (PEMRG)

81

84

2017

2019

71

60
50

53

40
30

31

20
10

2011

2013

Source: Pew Research Center

In Exercises 95–98, write your answer rounded to two
decimal places.
95. Find the length of the golden rectangle whose width is 14.72 in.

370

		 The quadratic equation p = 258 + 4.32 x + 0.42 x 2 models this data, where x represents the number of years after
2007 (x = 0 corresponds to the year 2007). Based on this
model
a. what was the global plastics production (round to the nearest million tonne) in 2015?
b. what will be the global plastics production (round to the
nearest million tonne) in 2025?

Percent of population

114

2015
Year

		 The quadratic equation p = 30.6 + 13.27 x − 0.82 x 2
models this data, where x represents the number of years
after 2011 (x = 0 corresponds to the year 2011). Based on
this model
a. what percent (round to the nearest percent) owned smartphones in 2016?
b. how do you know this model is inaccurate for the year 2030?
105. Geometry. The length of a rectangle is 5 centimeters more
than its width. The area of the rectangle is 500 square centimeters. Find the dimensions of the rectangle.
106. Geometry. The sides of a rectangle are in the ratio 3:2.
The area of the rectangle is 216 square centimeters. Find the
dimensions of the rectangle.
107. Cutting a wire. A wire of length 16 inches is to be cut into
two pieces; then each piece will be bent to form a square. Find
the length of the two pieces assuming that the sum of the areas
of the two squares is 10 square inches.
16 in
x

16 2 x

108. Cutting a wire. A piece of wire is 38 inches long. The
wire is cut into two pieces; then each piece is bent to form a
square. Find the length of each piece if three times the area
of the larger square exceeds the area of the smaller square
by 95.75 square inches.
109. Manufacturing. The surface area A of a cylinder with
height h and radius r is given by the equation
A = 2πrh + 2πr 2 . A company makes soup cans by using
32 π square inches of aluminum sheet for each can.
Assuming that the height of the can is 6 inches, find the
radius of the can.

Section 1.3 Quadratic Equations
110. Concrete patio. To make a rectangular concrete patio, a
homeowner used 70 feet of perimeter, into which she
poured 138 cubic feet of concrete to form a slab 6 inches
thick. What were the dimensions of the patio?

111. Making a box. The volume of a box is given by the equation
V = length ⋅ width ⋅ height. A topless box is to be made
from a square sheet of tin by cutting 5-inch squares from each
of the four corners and then shaping the tin into an open box
by turning up the sides. Assuming that the box is to hold 480
cubic inches, find the size of the piece of tin to be used.
x

x 2 10

115

116. A4 paper. The A-Series International Standard Paper sizes
have been adopted by all countries in the world except the
United States and Canada. The standard includes A4, which
is the most commonly available paper size worldwide. The
A-series papers have the unique property that folding them
in half preserves the aspect ratio, that is, the ratio of its
length to its width. Based on that property, find the aspect
ratio of the A4 size paper.

117. Silver rectangle. A rectangle is called a silver rectangle if,
when two squares of side length equal to the height of the
rectangle are removed, the remaining rectangle is similar to
the original rectangle. Find the ratio of the length to the
width of the silver rectangle.

5 in

112. Making a box. A 2-inch square is cut from each corner of
a rectangular piece of cardboard whose length exceeds the
width by 4 inches. The sides are then turned up to form an
open box. Assuming that the volume of the box is 64 cubic
inches, find the dimensions of the box.
113. Bus travel. Two buses leave Atlanta at the same time, one
traveling west at an average of 52 miles per hour and the
other traveling north at an average of 39 miles per hour.
When will they be 390 miles apart?
114. Plane travel. Two planes left San Francisco at 2 p.m. One
flew east at a certain speed, and the other flew south at a
speed that was 100 kilometers per hour more than the speed
of the plane heading east. The planes were 2100 kilometers
apart at 5 p.m. How fast was each plane flying?
115. Gardening. You want to expand your present 25-foot by
15-foot garden by planting a border of flowers. The border
is to be of the same width around the entire garden. The
flowers you bought will fill an area of 624 square feet. How
wide should the border be?

118. Sky divers. Sky divers are in free fall from the time they
jump out of a plane until they open their parachutes. A sky
diver jumps from 5000 feet. The diver’s height h above the
ground t seconds after the jump is described by the equation
h = −16t 2 + 5000. Find the time during which the diver
is in free fall, assuming that the parachute opens at 1000
feet.
119. Physics. Suppose you throw a ball straight up from the
ground with a velocity of 112 feet per second. As the ball
moves up, gravity slows it. Eventually, the ball begins to fall
back to the ground. The height h of the ball after t seconds
in the air is given by the equation h = −16t 2 + 112t .
a. Find the height of the ball after two seconds.
b. How long will it take the ball to reach a height of 96
feet?
c. How long after you throw the ball will it return to the
ground?
120. Sound velocity. The speed of sound v ( in ft /sec ) depends
on the temperature T ° Celsius and is given by
1087 T + 273
.
16.25
a. Find the speed of sound if the air temperature is
T = 20 ° C.
b. Find the air temperature if the speed of sound is
1150 ft /sec .
v =

116

Chapter 1 Equations and Inequalities

Height of a projectile. The height, h, of a projectile thrown
straight up from the top of a 480-foot hill t seconds after
being thrown upward with initial velocity υ 0 ft /sec is given
by h = −16 t 2 + υ 0 t + 480. In Exercises 121–124, for a
given value of υ 0 , find the time(s) when the projectile will
(a) be at a height of 592 ft above the ground and (b) crash on
the ground. Round your answers to two decimal places.
121. v 0 = 96
122. v 0 = 112
123. v 0 = 256

124. v 0 = 64

Beyond the Basics
In Exercises 125–128, find the values of k for which the given
equation has equal roots.
125. x 2 − kx + 3 = 0
126. x 2 + 3kx + 8 = 0
127. 2 x 2 + kx + k = 0

133. If we know the roots r and s in advance, then a quadratic
equation with roots r and s can be expressed in the form
a ( x − r )( x − s ) = 0.
		 Form a quadratic equation that has the listed numbers as
roots. Provide the answers assuming a = 1.
a. −3, 4
b. 5, 5
c. 3 + 2, 3 − 2
134. How to construct a golden rectangle. Draw a square
ABCD with side of length x, as in the accompanying diagram. Let M be the midpoint of DC. The segment MB
sweeps out the arc BF so that F lies on the line through the
segment DC. Show that the rectangle AEFD is a golden
rectangle.
x

A

128. kx 2 + 2 x + 6 = 0

B

E

C

F

129. Assuming that r and s are the roots of the quadratic equation ax 2 + bx + c = 0, show that
b
c
and r ⋅ s = .
a
a
130. Find the sum and the product of the roots of the following
equations without solving the equation.
a. 3 x 2 + 5 x − 5 = 0
b. 3 x 2 − 7 x = 1
c. 3x 2 = 3 x + 4
d. ( 1 + 2 ) x 2 − 2 x − 5 = 0
r +s = −

In Exercises 131 and 132, determine k so that the sum and the
product of the roots are equal.
131. 2 x 2 + ( k − 3 ) x + 3k − 5 = 0

x

D

M

Critical Thinking / Discussion / Writing
135. If a, b, and k are real numbers, show that the solutions of
the equation ( x − a )( x − b ) = k 2 are real.
136. Show that for 0 < a < 4, the equation ax ( 1 − x ) = 1 has
no real solutions.

132. 5 x 2 + ( 2k − 3 ) x − 2k + 3 = 0

GETTING READY

for the Next Section

REVIEW CONCEPTS
FOIL method (Section P.3, page 34)
Special product formulas (Section P.3, page 36)
REVIEW SKILLS
Arithmetic of like radicals (Section P.6, pages 64–65)
In Exercises GR1–GR8, perform the indicated operations.
GR1. ( 3 +

2 )( 3 −

GR3. ( 2 +

2

GR5.

5)

5 + 5 20
5

16 − 100
GR7.
2

2)

GR2. ( 1 − 2 7 )( 1 + 2 7 )
GR4. ( 2 −
GR6.

6+

3)

27
3

18 − 108
GR8.
12

2

Arithmetic of polynomials (Section P.6, pages 31–37)
In Exercises GR9–GR16, perform the indicated operations.
GR9. ( 3 x + 2 ) + ( x − 7 )
GR10. ( 5 x − 9 ) + ( 6 − x )
GR11. ( 9 x + 4 ) − ( 2 x + 12 )

GR12. ( 6 x − 5 ) − ( 3 x + 4 )

GR13. ( 3 x + 2 )( x − 9 )

GR14. ( 2 x − 5 )( 3 x + 4 )

GR15. ( x − 3 )( x + 3 )

GR16. ( 5 x + 2 )( 5 x − 2 )

Solving quadratic equations by using the
quadratic formula (Section 1.3, pages 108–109)
In Exercises GR17–GR20, solve each equation.
GR17. x 2 + 4 x + 1 = 0
GR18. x 2 + 5 x + 5 = 0
GR19. 5 x 2 + 8 x + 2 = 0

GR20. −2 x 2 + 5 x − 1 = 0

Section 1.4 Complex Numbers: Quadratic Equations with Complex Solutions

1.4

117

Complex Numbers: Quadratic Equations
with Complex Solutions
Objectives

Videos for
this Section

1

Define complex numbers.

2

Add and subtract complex numbers.

3

Multiply complex numbers.

4

Divide complex numbers.

5

Solve quadratic equations having complex solutions.

Alternating Current Circuits
Nowadays our electricity comes in two different forms: alternating current (AC) and direct
current (DC). In DC circuits the electric
charge (current) only flows in one direction,
whereas in AC circuits it periodically reverses
direction. Our cities are predominately powered by AC circuits as it permits a more economic way to transfer electricity over long
distances. Ohm's Law describes the relation
between the voltage ( V ), current (I), and resistance (R) in DC circuits. In AC circuits the situation is more complicated. When capacitors and/or inductors are involved, the current and
voltage do not peak at the same time and therefore create a phase shift. In 1893, Charles Steinmetz successfully utilized complex numbers to properly describe this phenomena and provide the
breakthrough in understanding AC circuits. To compute the impedance (Z) of an AC circuit, the
resistance (of resistors) is viewed as a real part of Z, and the reactance (of capacitors and inductors) is viewed as an imaginary part of Z.
Contribution to complex impendance:

Phase:

R

I

R

Resistor:

V
V

XL
iXL

Inductor:

I
XC
Capacitor:

I
2iXC
V

In Example 7, we use complex numbers to compute the total impedance in an AC circuit.

Objective 1

Complex Numbers
Because the square of a real number is nonnegative (that is, x 2 ≥ 0 for any real number x),
the equation x 2 = −1 has no solution in the set of real numbers. To solve such equations,
we extend the real numbers to a larger set called the set of complex numbers. We first introduce a new number i whose square is −1.

118

Chapter 1 Equations and Inequalities

DO YOU KNOW?
In 1777, the great Swiss
mathematician Leonhard Euler
introduced the symbol i for
−1. However, electrical
engineers often use the letter
j for −1 because in electrical
engineering problems, the
symbol i is traditionally
reserved for the electric
current.

TECHNOLOGY CONNECTION
Most graphing calculators
allow you to work with complex
numbers by changing from real
to a + bi mode. Once the
a + bi mode is set, the −1 is
recognized as i. The i key is
used to enter complex numbers
such as 2 + 3i.

Definition of i
The square root of −1 is called i.
i =

−1 so that i 2 = −1.

The number i is called the imaginary unit.

With the introduction of the number i, the equation x 2 = −1 has two solutions,
x = ± −1 = ±i.
Complex Numbers
A complex number z is a number of the form
z = a + bi,
where a and b are real numbers and i = −1, ( so i 2 = −1).
The number a is called the real part of z, and the number b is called the imaginary
part of z.

A complex number z written in the form a + bi is said to be in standard form. Where
convenient, we use the form a + ib as equivalent to a + bi. A complex number with
a = 0 and b ≠ 0, written as bi, is called a pure imaginary number. If b = 0, then the
complex number a + bi = a is a real number. So real numbers form a subset of the complex numbers (with imaginary part 0). Figure 1.5 shows how various sets of numbers are
contained within larger sets.
The real and imaginary parts of
a complex number can then be
found.

Complex numbers of the form a 1 bi, where a and b
are real numbers and i 5 21
2 1 3i
12i

1
2 1i
2
23 2 5i

2i

Real numbers a 1 bi with b 5 0
Rational numbers
Integers:
{. . ., 23, 22, 21, 0, 1, . . .}
Natural numbers
{1, 2, 3, …}

Irrational numbers
2, 2 3, e, p,
2

5
,3
3

7

24i

3
1i
5

2

2
2i
5

3

3
2 , 0.75, 5.7
2

Figure 1.5

Complex numbers

We can express the square root of any negative number as a product of a real number and i.
Square Root of a Negative Number
For any positive number b,
−b = ( b ) i = i b.

We usually write i b rather than bi because bi is easily confused with bi.

Section 1.4 Complex Numbers: Quadratic Equations with Complex Solutions

EXAMPLE 1

SIDE NOTE
Here is a visual reminder of the
parts of a complex number.
a + bi
↑ ↑
Real
Imaginary
part
part

119

Identifying the Real and Imaginary Parts of a Complex Number

Identify the real and imaginary parts of each complex number.
1
a. 2 + 5i    b. 7 − i   c. 3i    d. −9   e. 0   f. 3 + −25
2
Solution
To identify the real and imaginary parts, we express each number in the standard form a + bi.
a. 2 + 5i is already written as a + bi; real part 2, imaginary part 5
1
1
1
b. 7 − i = 7 + −
i; real part 7, imaginary part −
2
2
2
c. 3i = 0 + 3i; real part 0, imaginary part 3
d. −9 = −9 + 0i; real part −9, imaginary part 0
e. 0 = 0 + 0i; real part 0, imaginary part 0
f. 3 + −25 = 3 + ( 25 ) i = 3 + 5i; real part 3, imaginary part 5

( )

Practice Problem 1. Identify the real and imaginary parts of each complex number.
1
a. −1 + 2i     b. − − 6i    c. 8
3
Equality of Complex Numbers
Two complex numbers z = a + bi and w = c + di are equal if and only if
a = c and b = d .

Objective 2

Addition and Subtraction
The standard form of a complex number a + bi is similar to the binomial form a + bx.
The rules for equality, addition, and subtraction preserve the familiar rules used for these
binomials.
Addition and Subtraction of Complex Numbers
For real numbers a, b, c, and d, let z = a + bi and w = c + di.
Sum: z + w = ( a + bi ) + ( c + di ) = ( a + c ) + ( b + d ) i
Difference: z − w = ( a + bi ) − ( c + di ) = ( a − c ) + ( b − d ) i
To add or subtract complex numbers, add or subtract the real parts and add or
subtract the imaginary parts. Write the sum or difference in standard form, a + bi.

TECHNOLOGY CONNECTION
In a + bi mode, most graphing
calculators perform addition
and subtraction of complex
numbers using the ordinary
addition and subtraction keys.

EXAMPLE 2

Adding and Subtracting Complex Numbers

Write the sum or difference of two complex numbers in standard form.
a. ( 3 + 7i ) + ( 2 − 4i )
b. ( 5 + 9i ) − ( 6 − 8i )
c. ( 2 + −9 ) − ( −2 + −4 )
Solution
a. ( 3 + 7i ) + ( 2 − 4i ) = ( 3 + 2 ) + [ 7 + ( −4 ) ] i = 5 + 3i
b. ( 5 + 9i ) − ( 6 − 8i ) = ( 5 − 6 ) + [ 9 − ( −8 ) ] i = −1 + 17i
−9 = 3i, −4 = 2i
c. ( 2 + −9 ) − ( −2 + −4 ) = ( 2 + 3i ) − ( −2 + 2i )
= 2 + 3i + 2 − 2i
= ( 2 + 2 ) + ( 3 − 2 )i
= 4+i

120

Chapter 1 Equations and Inequalities

Practice Problem 2. Write the following complex numbers in standard form.
a. ( 1 − 4i ) + ( 3 + 2i )
b. ( 4 + 3i ) − ( 5 − i )
c. ( 3 − −9 ) − ( 5 − −64 )

Objective 3

Multiplying Complex Numbers
We multiply complex numbers by using FOIL (as we do with binomials; see page 34) and
then replace i 2 with −1. For example,
F
O
I
L
( 2 + 5i )( 4 + 3i ) = 2 ⋅ 4 + 2 ⋅ 3i + 5i ⋅ 4 + 5i ⋅ 3i

= 8 + 6i + 20i + 15i 2
Replace i 2 with −1.

= 8 + 26i + 15( −1 )
= ( 8 − 15 ) + 26i
= −7 + 26i.
Multiplying Complex Numbers
For all real numbers a, b, c, and d,

( a + bi )( c + di ) = ( ac − bd ) + ( ad + bc ) i.

EXAMPLE 3

Multiplying Complex Numbers

Write the following products in standard form.
a. ( 3 − 5i )( 2 + 7i )

b. −2i ( 5 − 9i )

Solution
F

O

I

L

a. ( 3 − 5i )( 2 + 7i ) = 6 + 2 1 i − 10 i − 3 5 i 2
= 6 + 11i + 35

Because i 2 = −1, − 35i 2 = 35.

= 41 + 11i

Combine terms.

b. −2i ( 5 − 9i ) = −10i + 18i 2
= −10i − 18
= −18 − 10i

Distributive property
Because i 2 = −1, 18i 2 = −18.

Practice Problem 3. Write the following products in standard form.
a. ( 2 − 6i )( 1 + 4i )
WARNING

b. −3i ( 7 − 5i )



Recall from algebra that if a and b are positive real numbers, then
a b = ab.
However, this property is not true for all complex numbers. For example,
−9 −9 = ( 3i )( 3i ) = 9i 2 = 9 ( −1) = −9,
but

( − 9 )( − 9 ) =

81 = 9.

Thus,

−9 −9 ≠

( − 9 )( − 9 ).

When performing multiplication (or division) involving square roots of negative
numbers (say, −b with b > 0 ) , always write −b = i b before performing the
operation.

Section 1.4 Complex Numbers: Quadratic Equations with Complex Solutions

EXAMPLE 4

121

Multiplication Involving Square Roots of Negative Numbers

Perform the indicated operation and write the result in standard form.
a. −2 −8
b. −3 ( 2 + −3 )
c. (−2 +
d. ( 3 + −2 )( 1 + −32 )

−3) 2

Solution
a. −2 −8 = i 2 ⋅ i 8 = i 2 2 ⋅ 8 = i 2 16 = ( −1 )( 4 ) = −4
b.

−3 ( 2 +

c. ( −2 +

−3 ) = i 3 ( 2 + i 3 )
= 2i 3 + i 2 9

Distributive property

= 2i 3 + ( −1)( 3 )

i 2 = −1,

= −3 + 2i 3

Standard form

2

−3 ) = ( −2 + i 3 )
= 4 − 4i

9 = 3

2

= ( −2 ) 2 + 2 ( −2 )( i

d. ( 3 +

−3 = i 3

−3 = i 3
3) + (i 3)

2

( a + b ) 2 = a 2 + 2ab + b 2
2

( i 3 ) = ( i 3 )( i 3 )

3 + 3i 2

= 3i 2
= −1

= 4 − 4i 3 + 3 ( − 1 )

i2

= 1 − 4i 3

Simplify.

−2 )( 1 +

−32 )

= ( 3 + i 2 )( 1 + i 32 )

−2 = i 2,

= 3 + 3i 32 + i 2 + ( i 2 )( i 32 )

FOIL

= 3 + 3i ( 4 2 ) + i 2 + i 2 64

32 =

= 3 + 12i 2 + i 2 + ( −1 )( 8 )

i 2 = −1

= −5 + 13 2i

Add.

−32 = i 32

16 ⋅ 2 = 4 2

Practice Problem 4. Perform the indicated operation and write the result in standard
form.
a. (−3 + −4) 2
b. ( 5 + −2 )( 4 + −8 )


Objective 4

Complex Conjugates and Division
To perform the division of complex numbers, it is helpful to learn about the conjugate of a
complex number.

TECHNOLOGY CONNECTION
In a + bi mode, most graphing
calculators can compute the
complex conjugate of a
complex number.

Conjugate of a Complex Number
If z = a + bi, then the conjugate (or complex conjugate) of z is denoted by z and
defined by z = a + bi = a − bi.

Note that the conjugate z of a complex number has the same real part as z does, but the sign
of the imaginary part is changed. For example, 2 + 7i = 2 − 7i and 5 − 3i = 5 + ( −3 ) i
= 5 − ( −3 ) i = 5 + 3i.
EXAMPLE 5

Multiplying a Complex Number by Its Conjugate

Find the product zz for each complex number z.
a. z = 2 + 5i

b. z = 1 − 3i

122

Chapter 1 Equations and Inequalities

Solution
a. If z = 2 + 5i, then z = 2 − 5i.
zz = ( 2 + 5i )( 2 − 5i ) = 2 2 − ( 5i ) 2

Difference of squares

= 4 − 25i 2

( 5i ) 2

= 4 − ( −25 )

Because i 2 = −1, 25i 2 = −25.

= 29

Simplify.

b. If z = 1 − 3i, then z = 1 + 3i.
zz = ( 1 − 3i )( 1 + 3i ) = 1 2 − ( 3i ) 2

= 5 2 i 2 = 25i 2

Difference of squares
( 3i ) 2

= 1 − 9i 2

= 3 2 i 2 = 9i 2
Because i 2 = −1, 9i 2 = −9.
Simplify.

= 1 − ( −9 )
= 10

Practice Problem 5. Find the product zz for each complex number z.
a. 1 + 6i
b. −2i 


The results in Example 5 correctly suggest the following theorem.
SIDE NOTE

Complex Conjugate Product Theorem

Notice that the product of a
complex number and its
conjugate is always a real
number.

If z = a + bi, then
zz = a 2 + b 2 .

To write the reciprocal of a nonzero complex number or the quotient of two complex
numbers in the form a + bi, multiply the numerator and denominator by the conjugate of
the denominator. By the Complex Conjugate Product Theorem, the resulting denominator
is a real number.
Dividing Complex Numbers
To write the quotient of two complex numbers w and z ( z ≠ 0 ), write
w
wz
=
z
zz

Multiply numerator and denominator by z .

and then write the right side in standard form.

EXAMPLE 6

Dividing Complex Numbers

Write the following quotients in standard form.
4 + −25
1
b.
2+i
2 − −9
Solution
a. The denominator is 2 + i, so its conjugate is 2 − i.
a.

1
1( 2 − i )
=
(
2+i
2 + i )( 2 − i )
2−i
= 2
2 + 12
2−i
=
5
2
−1
i
= +
5
5

Multiply numerator and
denominator by 2 − i.
( 2 + i )( 2 − i ) = 2 2 + 1 2

Simplify.
Standard form

Section 1.4 Complex Numbers: Quadratic Equations with Complex Solutions

b. We write −25 = 5i and −9 = 3i so that

In a + bi mode, most graphing
calculators perform division of
complex numbers with the
ordinary division key. The Frac
option displays results using
rational numbers.

4 + −25
4 + 5i
.
=
2 − 3i
2 − −9

Multiply numerator and
denominator by 2 + 3i.

( 4 + 5i )( 2 + 3i )
4 + 5i
=
( 2 − 3i )( 2 + 3i )
2 − 3i

8 + 12i + 10i + 15i 2
22 + 32
−7 + 22i
=
13
7
22
i
= − +
13
13

Use FOIL in the numerator;

=

TECHNOLOGY CONNECTION

123

( 2 − 3i )( 2 + 3i ) = 2 2 + 3 2.

15i 2 = −15, 8 − 15 = −7
Standard form

Practice Problem 6. Write the following quotients in standard form.
2
−3i
b.



a.
1−i
4 + −25
For AC circuits with components connected in series, the total impedance is the sum of
impedance of each component Z = Z 1 + Z 2 .
R

XL

XC
Total impedance Z 5 R 1 i(XL 2 XC).

For AC circuits with components connected in parallel, the reciprocal of total impedance is the sum of reciprocals of impedance of each component
1
1
1
=
+
Z
Z1
Z2
The reciprocal of a complex
number can also be found
using the reciprocal key.

EXAMPLE 7

or

Z =

Z 1Z 2
.
Z1 + Z 2

Using Complex Numbers in AC Circuits

a. Find the total impedance of the following AC circuits:
R 5 2V

XL 5 3V

R 5 3V

XC 5 4V

b. Find the total impedance of the following AC circuit:
XL 5 3V

R 5 2V

R 5 3V

XC 5 4V

Solution
a. The left circuit has a resistor ( 2Ω ) in series with an inductor ( 3Ω ). The total impedance is a sum Z 1 = 2 + 3i ohms. The right circuit has a resistor ( 3Ω ) in series with a
capacitor ( 4Ω ). The total impedance is a sum, Z 2 = 3 − 4i ohms.
b. Let’s call the impedance given by the upper part of the circuit Z 1, and the impedance
given by the lower part Z 2 . By computations performed in a Z 1 = 2 + 3i ohms and
Z 2 = 3 − 4i ohms. The impedance Z 1 and Z 2 are connected in parallel, hence the total
resistance Z is given by
1
1
1
=
+
Z
Z1
Z2

or

Z =

Z 1Z 2
.
Z1 + Z 2

124

Chapter 1 Equations and Inequalities

We first calculate Z 1 + Z 2 and Z 1Z 2 .
Z 1 + Z 2 = ( 2 + 3i ) + ( 3 − 4i ) = 5 − i
Z 1Z 2 = ( 2 + 3i )( 3 − 4i )
= 6 − 8i + 9i − 12i 2
FOIL
= 18 + i
Zt =

Set i 2 = −1 and simplify.

Z 1Z 2
18 + i
=
Z1 + Z 2
5−i
( 18 + i )( 5 + i )
=
( 5 − i )( 5 + i )

Multiply numerator and denominator by
conjugate of the denominator.

90 + 18i + 5i + i 2
5 2 + 12
89 + 23i
=
26
89
23
=
+
i
26
26

Use FOIL in the numerator;

=

( 5 − i )( 5 + i ) = 5 2 + 1 2.

Set i 2 = −1 and simplify.
Standard form

Practice Problem 7. Find the total impedance of the following AC circuit:
XL 5 2V

R 5 1V

XC 5 3V

R 5 2V



Objective 5

Quadratic Equations with Complex Solutions
The methods of solving quadratic equations introduced in the previous section are also
applicable to solving quadratic equations with complex solutions.
EXAMPLE 8

Solving Quadratic Equations with Complex Solutions

Solve each equation.
a. x 2 + 4 = 0

b. x 2 + 2 x + 2 = 0

Solution
a. Use the square root method.
x2 + 4 = 0
x 2 = −4

Original equation
Add −4 to both sides.

x = ± −4 = ± ( 4 ) i = ±2i

Solve for x.

The solution set is { −2i, 2i } . You should check these solutions.
b. x 2 + 2 x + 2 = 1 ⋅ x 2 + 2 x + 2 = 0
x =

−2 ±

2 2 − 4 ( 1 )( 2 )
2 (1)

−2 ± −4
2
2 ( −1 ± i )
−2 ± 2i
=
=
2
2
= −1 ± i
=

Use the quadratic formula
with a = 1, b = 2, and c = 2.
Simplify.

The solution set is { −1 − i, −1 + i } . You should check these solutions.

Section 1.4 Complex Numbers: Quadratic Equations with Complex Solutions

Practice Problem 8. Solve.
a. 4 x 2 + 9 = 0
b. x 2 = 4 x − 13

125



The Discriminant
Recall that in the quadratic formula
b 2 − 4 ac
,
2a
the quantity b 2 − 4 ac under the radical sign is called the discriminant. If a, b, and c are
real numbers (not necessarily integers) and a ≠ 0, the discriminant reveals the type of
solutions of the equation ax 2 + bx + c = 0, as shown in the table below.
x =

Discriminant

Description of Solutions

b 2 − 4 ac > 0
b 2 − 4 ac

−b ±

There are two unequal real solutions.

= 0 There is one real solution.
There are two nonreal complex solutions,
and they are conjugates.

b 2 − 4 ac < 0

EXAMPLE 9

Using the Discriminant

Use the discriminant to determine the number and type of solutions of each quadratic equation.
a. x 2 − 4 x + 2 = 0
b. 2t 2 + 2t + 19 = 0
c. 4 x 2 + 4 x + 1 = 0
Solution
Equation

b 2 − 4 ac

a. x 2 − 4 x + 2 = 0

(−4) 2 − 4 ( 1 )( 2 ) = 8 > 0

b. 2t 2 + 2t + 19 = 0 (2) 2 − 4 ( 2 )( 19 ) = −148 < 0
c. 4 x 2 + 4 x + 1 = 0 (4) 2 − 4 ( 4 )( 1 ) = 0

Conclusion

Two unequal real solutions
Two nonreal complex
solutions
Exactly one real solution

Practice Problem 9. Determine the number and type of solutions.
a. 9 x 2 − 6 x + 1 = 0
b. x 2 − 5 x + 3 = 0
c. 2 x 2 − 3 x + 4 = 0.

1.4

Exercises

Videos for
select exercises

Concepts and Vocabulary
1. We define i =

so that i 2 =

.

2. A complex number in the form a + bi is said to be in
.
3. For b > 0,

−b =

4. The conjugate of a + bi is
conjugate of a − bi is

.
, and the
.

5. True or False. The product of a complex number and its
conjugate is a real number.

1
8. True or False. The standard form of is a + bi where
i
a = 1 and b = −1.

Building Skills
In Exercises 9–32, perform each operation and write the
result in the standard form a + bi.
9. ( 5 + 2i ) + ( 3 + i )
10. ( 6 + i ) + ( 1 + 2i )
11. ( 4 − 3i ) − ( 5 + 3i )

12. ( 3 − 5i ) − ( 3 + 2i )

6. True or False. Division by a nonzero complex number z is
accomplished by multiplying the numerator and denominator
by z .

13. ( −2 − 3i ) + ( −3 − 2i )

14. ( −5 − 3i ) + ( 2 − i )

7. True or False. A pure imaginary number does not have a
conjugate.

15. 3( 5 + 2i )

16. 4 ( 3 + 5i )

17. −4 ( 2 − 3i )

18. −7( 3 − 4i )

19. 3i ( 5 + i )

20. 2i ( 4 + 3i )

21. 4i ( 2 − 5i )

22. −3i ( 5 − 2i )

126

Chapter 1 Equations and Inequalities

23. ( 3 + i )( 2 + 3i )		24. ( 4 + 3i )( 2 + 5i )
25. ( 2 − 3i )( 2 + 3i )

26. ( 4 − 3i )( 4 + 3i )

27. ( 3 + 4i )( 4 − 3i )

28. ( −2 + 3i )( −3 + 10i )

29. ( 3 − 12i )
31. ( 2 −

2

30. ( − 5 − 13i )

2

32. ( 5 − 2i )( 3 +

−16 )( 3 + 5i )

−25 )

In Exercises 33–38, write the conjugate z of each complex
number z. Then find zz .
33. z = 2 − 3i
34. z = 4 + 5i
1
2
1
35. z = − 2i
36. z = + i
2
3
2
37. z =

2 − 3i

38. z =

5+

3i

In Exercises 39–52, write each quotient in the standard form
a + bi.
5
2
−1
39.
40.
41.
−i
−3i
1+i
1
42.
2−i

5i
43.
2+i

3i
44.
2−i

45.

2 + 3i
1+i

46.

3 + 5i
4+i

47.

2 − 5i
4 − 7i

48.

3 + 5i
1 − 3i

49.

2 + −4
1+i

50.

5 − −9
3 + 2i

51.

−2 + −25
2 − 3i

52.

−5 − −4
5 − −9

In Exercises 53–62, solve each equation.
53. x 2 + 5 = 1
54. 4 x 2 + 9 = 0
55. z 2 − 2 z + 2 = 0

56. x 2 − 6 x + 11 = 0

57. 2 x 2 − 20 x + 49 = −7

58. 4 y 2 + 4 y + 5 = 0

59. 8( x 2 − x ) =

60. t ( t + 1 ) = 3t 2 + 1

x2 − 3

61. 9k 2 + 25 = 0

62. 3k 2 + 4 = 0

Applying the Concepts

XL 5 1V

XC 5 5V

64. Parallel circuits. Find the total impedance of the following
AC circuit.
R 5 2V

R 5 3V

66. Finding impedance: I = 7 + 4i    V = 45 + 88i
67. Finding voltage: Z = 5 − 7i    I = 2 + 5i
68. Finding voltage: Z = 7 − 8i    I =

1
1
+ i
3
6

69. Finding current: V = 12 + 10i    Z = 12 + 6i
70. Finding current: V = 29 + 18i    Z = 25 + 6i

Beyond the Basics
In Exercises 71–80, find each power of i and simplify the
expression.
71. i 17
72. i 125
73. i −7
74. i −24
75. i 10 + 7

76. 9 + i 3

77. 3i 5 − 2i 3

78. 5i 6 − 3i 4

79. 2i 3 ( 1 + i 4 )

80. 5i 5 ( i 3 − i )

81. Prove that the reciprocal of a + bi, where both a and b are
a
b
− 2
i.
nonzero, is 2
a + b2
a + b2
In Exercises 82–84, let z = a + bi. Prove each statement.
z+ z
z−z
83. b =
82. a =
2
2i
84. The product zz = 0 if and only if z = 0.
1 − 2i
2 − 3i
=
.
5 − 5i
9 − 7i
86. Write in standard form:
1+i
2+i
÷
.
1−i
1 + 2i
87. Solve for z:
( 1 + 3i ) z + ( 2 + 4i ) = 7 − 3i.
88. Let z = 2 − 3i and w = 1 + 2i.
85. Show that

a. Show that ( zw ) = ( z )( w ).  b. Show that

63. Series circuits. Find the total impedance of the following
AC circuit.
R 5 9V

In Exercises 65–70, use the equation V = ZI to find the value
that is not specified.
65. Finding impedance: I = 7 + 5i   V = 35 + 70i

XC 5 5V

XL 5 7V

		 As with impedance, the current I and voltage V in a circuit
can be represented by complex numbers. The three quantities
(voltage, V; impedance, Z; and current, I ) are related by the
V
equation Z = . Thus, if two of these values are given, the
I
value of the third can be found from the equation.

( wz ) = wz .

Critical Thinking / Writing / Discussion
89. State whether each of the following is true or false. Explain
your reasoning.
a. Every real number is a complex number.
b. Every complex number is a real number.
c. Every complex number is an imaginary number.
d. A real number is a complex number whose imaginary
part is 0.
e. The product of a complex number and its conjugate is a
real number.
f. The equality z = z holds if and only if z is a real
number.
1+i n
90. Find the least positive n for which
= 1.
1−i
91. Show that the set of complex numbers does not have the ordering properties of the set of real numbers. [Hint: Assume that
ordering properties hold. Then by the law of trichotomy, i = 0
or i < 0 or i > 0. Show that each leads to a contradiction.]

(

)

92. Suppose that multiplication of complex numbers had been
defined as
( a + bi )( c + di ) = ac + ( bd ) i.
		 Find two complex numbers z and w, z ≠ 0, w ≠ 0 but
zw = 0.

Section 1.5 Solving Other Types of Equations

GETTING READY

for the Next Section

REVIEW CONCEPTS
Factoring polynomials (Section P.4, pages 39–46)

GR5.

Solving quadratic equations (Section 1.3, pages 102–110)

GR7.

REVIEW SKILLS

GR8.

Factoring by grouping (Section P.4, pages 44–45)
In Exercises GR1 and GR2, factor each expression by grouping.
GR1. x 3 − x 2 − 9 x + 9
GR2.

127

−x 3 − 2 x 2 + 25 x + 50

Arithmetic of rational expressions, least common
denominator (Section P.5, pages 53–55)
In Exercises GR3–GR8, find the LCD for each group of
rational expressions.
1
3
x
1
GR3.
,
GR4.
,
x −1 x
2−x x−2

15
3x
2x + 1
9
,
GR6. 2
,
x+3 x−3
x − 25 5 − x
x+1
12
,
( x − 3 )( 2 − x ) ( x − 2 )( x + 1 )
x
7
1
,
,
4 x 2 − 1 2x − 1 x

Evaluate expressions with rational exponents.
(Section P.6, pages 67–69)
In Exercises GR9–GR12, simplify each expression.
GR9. 27 2 / 3
GR10. 8 4 / 3
GR11. 4 5/ 2
GR12. 25 3/ 2
Simplify expressions with rational exponents.
(Section P.6, pages 69–70)
In Exercises GR13–GR16, simplify each expression.
GR13. ( 3 + x 2 )

2

GR15. ( ( 3 x 2 + 7 )1/ 3 )

1.5

GR14. ( 1 +
3

x + 1)

GR16. ( ( 5 x − 2 )3/ 5 )

2
5/ 3

Solving Other Types of Equations
Objectives

Videos for
this Section

1

Solve equations by factoring.

2

Solve rational equations.

3

Solve equations involving radicals.

4

Solve equations with rational exponents.

5

Solve equations that are quadratic in form.

Space Exploration

Diana Trujillo

Since the July 20, 1969, Moon landing, humans have been dreaming of further space exploration. In 2015, NASA reaffirmed the goal of sending humans to Mars in the 2030s. On February
18, 2021, as part of NASA's Mars Exploration Program, a diverse team of scientists and engineers successfully landed the rover Perseverance on Mars’ surface. The team included Diana
Trujillo and Christina Hernandez. Diana Trujillo, a Colombian-born engineer, immigrated to
the United States at the age of seventeen with only $300 in her pocket. She joined the NASA
team in 2007 and is currently leading the engineering team responsible for the robotic arm of
the Perseverance rover. Christina Hernandez, whose family immigrated from Mexico, joined
the NASA team in 2013 and became a payload system engineer for the Perseverance rover.
It took the Perseverance around 7 months to get to Mars. The nearest-known star to the
Sun, Proxima Centauri, is 4.2 light-years away. Current technology would take us there in
6,000–10,000 years. Traveling beyond the Solar System would require speeds at a high percentage of the speed of light and would be subjected to the time dilation effect. We investigate this effect in Example 11.

128

Chapter 1 Equations and Inequalities



Objective 1

The Perseverance rover

Solving Equations by Factoring
The factoring method used in solving quadratic equations can also be used to solve certain
nonquadratic equations. Specifically, we use the following strategy for solving those equations that can be expressed in factored form with 0 on one side.

PROCEDURE IN ACTION
EXAMPLE 1

Solving Equations by Factoring

Objective

Example

Use factoring techniques to solve an equation.

Solve x 3 + 3 x 2 = 4 x + 12.

Step 1 Make one side zero. Move all nonzero
terms in the equation to one side (say, the left side)
so that the other side (the right side) is 0.
Step 2 Factor the left side.
Step 3 Use the zero-product property. Set each
factor in Step 2 equal to 0 and then solve the
resulting equations.
Step 4

Check your solutions.

x 3 + 3 x 2 − 4 x − 12 = 0

Subtract 4 x + 12
from both sides.

x 2 ( x + 3) − 4( x + 3) = 0
( x + 3 )( x 2 − 4 ) = 0
( x + 3 )( x + 2 )( x − 2 ) = 0
x+3 = 0
or
x = −3 or

Group for factoring.
Factor out x + 3.
Factor x 2 − 4.

x+2 = 0
or
x = −2 or

x−2 = 0
x = 2

Check

Check the solutions in the original equation.
?

For x = −3, ( −3 )3 + 3( −3 ) 2 = 4 ( −3 ) + 12
−27 + 27 = −12 + 12. ✓
You should also verify that x = −2 and x = 2 are solutions
of x 3 + 3 x 2 = 4 x + 12. The solution set is { −3, −2, 2 }.
Practice Problem 1. Solve: x 3 + 2 x 2 − x − 2 = 0.
EXAMPLE 2

Solving an Equation by Factoring

Solve by factoring: x 4 = 9 x 2 .
Solution
Step 1 Move all terms to the left side.
x 4 = 9x 2
Original equation
x 4 − 9x 2 = 0

Subtract 9 x 2 from both sides.

Section 1.5 Solving Other Types of Equations

Step 2

RECALL

Factor.

A 2 − B 2 = ( A + B )( A − B )
Difference of squares, page 42.

x 2( x 2 − 9) = 0

x 4 − 9x 2 = x 2 ( x 2 − 9 )

x 2 ( x + 3 )( x − 3 ) = 0

x 2 − 9 = ( x + 3 )( x − 3 )

Step 3 Set each factor equal to zero.
x 2 = 0 or x + 3 = 0
or x − 3 = 0
x = 0 or
Step 4

129

x = −3 or

Check

Let x = 0.
4 ?

x = 3

Solve each equation for x.

Let x = −3.

= 9( 0 )
0 = 0✓

(0)

Zero-product property

2

( −3 )

4 ?

= 9( −3 )
81 = 81 ✓

Let x = 3.
?

2

( 3 )4 =

9( 3 ) 2
81 = 81 ✓

Thus, the solution set of the equation is { −3, 0, 3 }. Note that 0 is a root of multiplicity 2.
Practice Problem 2. Solve: x 4 = 4 x 2 .
WARNING

Objective 2

A common error when solving an equation such as x 4 = 9 x 2 in Example 2 is to divide both sides
by x 2 , obtaining x 2 = 9 so that ±3 are the two solutions. This leads to the loss of the solution 0.
Remember, we can divide only by quantities that are not 0.

Rational Equations
Recall that if at least one algebraic expression with the variable in the denominator appears
in an equation, then the equation is a rational equation.
When we multiply a rational equation by an expression containing the variable, we
may introduce a solution that satisfies the new equation but does not satisfy the original
equation. Such a solution is called an extraneous solution or extraneous root. So whenever we multiply an equation by an expression containing the variable, we must check all
possible solutions obtained to reject extraneous solutions (if any).
EXAMPLE 3
Solve:

Solving a Rational Equation

1
1
1
+
= .
6
x+1
x

Solution
Step 1 Find the LCD. The LCD from the denominators
6, x + 1, and x is 6 x ( x + 1 ).
Step 2

Multiply both sides of the equation by the LCD and then make the right
side 0.

￼ ¯˚˘˚˙  1
1 
1
6 x( x + 1 )  +
 = 6 x ( x + 1 )  
x + 1
x
6
+
x
x
6
1
(
)
(
)
(
)
6x x +1
6x x + 1
+
=
6
x+1
x
x ( x + 1) + 6 x = 6( x + 1)

Step 3

Factor.

Multiply both sides by
the LCD.
Distributive property
Simplify.

x 2 + x + 6x = 6x + 6

Distributive property

x2 + x − 6 =

Subtract 6 x + 6 from both sides.

0

x2 + x − 6 = 0
( x + 3 )( x − 2 ) = 0

Factor.

130

Chapter 1 Equations and Inequalities

Step 4

Set each factor equal to zero.
x+3 = 0
or x − 2 = 0
x = −3 or
x = 2

Step 5

 Check You should check the solutions, −3 and 2, in the original equation.
The solution set is { −3, 2 }.

Practice Problem 3. Solve:
EXAMPLE 4
Solve:

1
12
1
−
= .
x
5 x + 10
5

Solving a Rational Equation with an Extraneous Solution

x
1
2x
.
−
= 2
x −1 x +1
x −1

Solution
Step 1 The LCD of the denominators ( x − 1 ), ( x + 1 ), ( x 2 − 1 ) = ( x − 1 )( x + 1 )
is ( x − 1 )( x + 1 ).
Step 2

SIDE NOTE

 x − 1 

 x − 1 x + 1

( x − 1 )( x + 1 ) 

Observe that the domain of x in
the original equation is the set
of all real numbers except −1
and 1.
Multiplying both sides by
( x − 1 )( x + 1 ) altered this
domain and therefore
introduced potential extraneous
solutions. The domain of x in the
new equation is the set of all
real numbers.

2x 
= ( x − 1 )( x + 1 )  2
 x − 1 
1
x
− ( x − 1 )( x + 1 )
( x − 1 )( x + 1)
x −1
x+1

Multiply both sides by
the LCD.

Distributive property;
( x − 1 )( x + 1 ) =

x2 − 1
2x
x2 − 1
( x + 1) x − ( x − 1) = 2 x

= ( x2 − 1 ) ⋅

x 2 + x − x + 1 − 2x

= 2x − 2x

x 2 − 2x + 1 = 0

Simplify.
Distributive property;
add −2 x to both sides.
Simplify.

Step 3

( x − 1 )( x − 1 ) = 0

Factor.

Step 4

x − 1 = 0 or

Solve for x.

Step 5

x = 1

Check Substitute x = 1 in the original equation.

x
1
2x
−
= 2
x −1 x +1
x −1
1
1
2 (1)
?
−
= 2
1−1 1+1
1 −1
The denominator of the first term is 0, so the equation is undefined for x = 1.
Therefore, x = 1 is not a solution of the original equation; it is extraneous. The
original equation has no solution. Its solution set is ∅.
Practice Problem 4. Solve:

Objective 3

x
2
4x
.
−
= 2
x−2
x+2
x −4

Equations Involving Radicals
If an equation involves radicals or rational exponents, the method of raising both sides to a
positive integer power is often used to remove them. When this is done, the solution set of
the new equation always contains the solutions of the original equation. However, in some

Section 1.5 Solving Other Types of Equations

131

cases, the new equation has more solutions than the original equation. For instance, consider the equation x = 4. If we square both sides, we get x 2 = 16. Notice that the given
equation, x = 4, has only one solution (namely, 4), whereas the new equation, x 2 = 16,
has two solutions: 4 and −4. Extraneous solutions may be introduced whenever both sides
of an equation are raised to an even power. Thus, it is essential that we check all solutions
obtained after raising both sides of an equation to any even power.
EXAMPLE 5
Solve: x =

SIDE NOTE
If A and B are algebraic
expressions, then every solution
of the equation A = B is also
a solution of the equation
A n = B n , for any positive
integer n.
However, solutions of
A n = B n are not necessarily
solutions of A = B.

Solving Equations Involving Radicals
6x − x 3 .

Solution
Because ( a ) 2 = a, we raise both sides of the equation to the second power to eliminate the
radical sign. The solutions of the original equation are among the solutions of the equation
x 2 = ( 6x − x 3 )

2

Square both sides of the equation.

( 6x − x 3 )

x 2 = 6x − x 3
x 3 + x 2 − 6x = 0

Factor out x from each term.

x ( x + 3 )( x − 2 ) = 0
x+3 = 0

x = 0 or

= 6x − x 3

Add x 3 − 6 x to both sides.

x( x 2 + x − 6) = 0
x = 0 or

2

Factor x 2 + x − 6.
or

x−2 = 0

Zero-product property

x = −3 or

x = 2.

Solve each equation.

Hence, the only possible solutions of x =

6 x − x 3 are −3, 0, and 2.

Check

Let x = −3.

Let x = 0.

?

6 ( −3 ) − ( −3 )

?

−18 + 27

−3 =
−3 =

3

Let x = 2.

?

6( 0 ) − ( 0 )

?

0

0 =
0 =

3

?

12 − 8

2 =
?

0 = 0 ✓

−3 = 9
−3 ≠ 3 ×

6 ( 2 ) − ( 2 )3

2 =

?

?

?

2 = 4
2 = 2 ✓

Thus, −3 is an extraneous solution; 0 and 2 are the solutions of the equation x =
The solution set is { 0, 2 } .
Practice Problem 5. Solve: x =
EXAMPLE 6

x 3 − 6x.

Solving an Equation Involving a Radical

Solve: 2 x + 1 + 1 = x

Solution
Step 1 We begin by isolating the radical to one side of the equation.
2x + 1 + 1 = x
2x + 1 = x − 1
Step 2

Original equation
Subtract 1 from both sides.

Next, we square both sides and simplify.
2

( 2 x + 1 ) = ( x − 1)2
2x + 1 = x 2 − 2x + 1

Square both sides.
2

( a ) = a;
( A − B )2

= A 2 − 2 AB + B 2

6x − x 3 .

132

Chapter 1 Equations and Inequalities

2 x + 1 − ( 2 x + 1) = x 2 − 2 x + 1 − ( 2 x + 1)
0 = x 2 − 4x
0 = x( x − 4 )
Step 3

Subtract 2 x + 1
from both sides.
Simplify.
Factor.

Set each factor equal to zero.
x = 0 or x − 4 = 0
x = 0 or

Step 4

x = 4

Solve for x.

Check

Let x = 0.

Let x = 4.

?

2( 4 ) + 1 + 1 = 4

?

?

9+1= 4

?

3+1= 4
4 = 4✓

2( 0 ) + 1 + 1 = 0

?

1+1= 0

?

1+1= 0
2 ≠ 0

Thus, 0 is an extraneous root; the only solution of the given equation is 4, and the solution
set is { 4 } .
Practice Problem 6. Solve:

6 x + 4 + 2 = x.

Next, we illustrate a method for solving radical equations that contain two or more square
root expressions.
EXAMPLE 7

Solving an Equation Involving Two Radicals

Solve: 2 x − 1 −

x −1 = 1

Solution
Step 1 We first isolate one of the radicals.
2x − 1 −

x −1 = 1
2x − 1 = 1 +

Step 2

Original equation
x −1

Add x − 1 to both sides to
isolate the radical 2 x − 1.

Square both sides of the last equation.
2

( 2 x − 1 ) = (1 + x − 1 )
2 x − 1 = 12 + 2 ⋅ 1 ⋅

2

Square both sides.

x − 1 + ( x − 1)

2

( A + B )2

= A 2 + 2 AB + B 2
2

2x − 1 = 1 + 2 x − 1 + x − 1

Simplify; use ( a ) = a.

2x − 1 = 2 x − 1 + x

Simplify.

Step 3

The last equation still contains a radical. We repeat the process of isolating
the radical expression.
x −1 = 2 x −1
( x − 1)2

= ( 2 x − 1)

x 2 − 2 x + 1 = 4 ( x − 1)
x 2 − 2x + 1 = 4 x − 4
x 2 − 6x + 5 = 0
( x − 5 )( x − 1 ) = 0

Subtract x from both sides and
simplify to isolate 2 x − 1.
2

Square both sides.
Use ( A − B ) 2 = A 2 − 2 AB + B 2
and ( AB ) 2 = A 2 B 2 .
Distributive property
Add −4 x + 4 to both sides; simplify.
Factor.

Section 1.5 Solving Other Types of Equations

Step 4

133

Set each factor equal to 0.
x−5 = 0

or

x −1 = 0

x = 5

or

x = 1

Solve for x.

Check You should check that the solutions of the original equation are 1 and
Step 5
5. The solution set is {1, 5 } .

Practice Problem 7. Solve:

x−5+

x = 5.

Solving Equations Containing Square Roots
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3
Step 4
Step 5

Objective 4

Isolate one radical to one side of the equation.
Square both sides of the equation in Step 1 and simplify.
If the equation obtained in Step 2 contains a radical, repeat Steps 1 and 2
to get an equation that is free of radicals.
Solve the equation obtained in Steps 1–3.
Check the solutions in the original equation.

Equations with Rational Exponents
If a given equation can be expressed in the form u m / n = k, then we isolate u by raising
n
m
both sides to the power
the reciprocal of
. Care must be taken with even roots.
m
n

(

RECALL

Solving Equations of the Form u m / n = k

Radical expressions such
as 3 −8 can be written as
expressions using rational
exponents. For example,
3
−8 = ( −8 )1/ 3 . In
general, if the n a exists,
a m/ n = ( n a )

)

m

Let m and n be positive integers, k ≥ 0 a real number, and

= n am.

m
in lowest terms. Then if
n

m is odd

m is even

and u m / n = k,
u = k n/m .

and u m / n = k,
u = ±k n / m .

When m is even we are taking an even root.

EXAMPLE 8

Solving Equations with Rational Exponents

Solve.
( 3x − 1)2 / 3 = 4
a. x 3 / 5 = 8   b.  
2( 2 x − 1 )3/ 2 − 30 = 24   c.  

Solution
a.

x 3/ 5 = 8
( x 3/ 5 )

5/3

= 8 5/ 3

Raise each side to the power

x = 8 5/ 3 = ( 3 8 )
x =

= 32

25

x 3/ 5

Check

( x 3/ 5 )
3

?

= 1

8 = 2

Replace x with 32.

?

( 32 ) = 8
5

5/ 3

= 8

32 3 / 5 = 8
3

5

?

23 = 8 ✓

Yes

5
.
3

134

Chapter 1 Equations and Inequalities

b. 2( 2 x − 1 )3/ 2 − 30 = 24

Original equation

2( 2 x − 1 )3/ 2 = 24 + 30
= 54
54
( 2 x − 1)3/ 2 =
= 27
2

( ( 2 x − 1)3/ 2 )

2/3

Add 30 to both sides and simplify.
Simplify.
Divide both sides by 2.
Raise both sides to the power

= ( 27 ) 2 / 3

( odd ) m = 3.

2
with
3

2

= ( 3 27 ) = 3 2 = 9
Isolate x.
Solve for x.

( 27 ) 2 / 3

2x − 1 = 9
2 x = 10
x=5

2 ( 2 x − 1 )3 / 2 − 30 = 24

Check

?

Replace x with 5.

?

2⋅5−1 = 9

?

( 9 ) 3/ 2

2 ( 2 ⋅ 5 − 1 )3 / 2 − 30 = 24
2( 9 )

3/ 2

− 30 = 24

2 ( 27 ) − 30 = 24

3

= ( 9 ) = ( 3 )3 = 27

?

54 − 30 = 24 ✓ Yes
c.

( 3x − 1)2 / 3 = 4

[ ( 3x − 1)

2 / 3 3/ 2

]

Original equation

= ±( 4 )

3/ 2

3 x − 1 = ±8
3x = 1 ± 8
Then
       or
3x = 1 + 8
3x = 9
x = 3

3
. Because the
2
denominator, 2, is even, we use the ± sign.
Raise each side to the power
3

= ( 4 ) = ( 2 )3 = 8
Add 1 to both sides.

( 4 )3 / 2

3x = 1 − 8
3 x = −7
7
x = −
3

7
Verify that both x = 3 and x = − satisfy the original equation.
3
7
The solution set is − , 3 .
3

{

}

Practice Problem 8.
Solve: a. 3( x − 2 )3/ 5 + 4 = 7.    b. ( 2 x + 1 ) 4 / 3 − 7 = 9.

Objective 5

Equations That Are Quadratic in Form
An equation in a variable x is quadratic in form if it can be written as
au 2 + bu + c = 0

( a ≠ 0 ),

where u is an expression in the variable x. We solve the equation au 2 + bu + c = 0
for u. Then the solutions of the original equation can be obtained by replacing u with
the expression in x that u represents.
EXAMPLE 9

Solving an Equation Quadratic in Form

Solve: x 2 / 3 − 5 x 1/ 3 + 6 = 0.

Section 1.5 Solving Other Types of Equations

135

Solution
The given equation is not a quadratic equation. However, if we let u = x 1/ 3 , then
2
u 2 = ( x 1/ 3 ) = x 2 / 3 . The original equation becomes a quadratic equation if we replace
1
/
3
x with u.
x 2 / 3 − 5 x 1/ 3 + 6 = 0
u 2 − 5u + 6 = 0
( u − 2 )( u − 3 ) = 0

u − 2 = 0 or u − 3 = 0
u = 2 or u = 3
Because u =

Original equation
Replace x 1/ 3 with u.
Factor.
Zero-product property
Solve for u.

x 1/ 3 , we find x from the equations u
= 2

or

x = 23

or

x = 8

or

x 1/ 3

= 3

x 1/ 3

= 2 and u = 3.

Replace u with x 1/ 3 .

m
1
= , so m = 1 is odd.
n
3
x = 27 are two apparent solutions.
x = 33

Here

Check You should check that both x = 8 and x = 27 satisfy the equation. The solution
set is { 8, 27 }.

Practice Problem 9. Solve: x 2 / 3 − 7 x 1/ 3 + 6 = 0.
WARNING

When u replaces an expression in the variable x in an equation that is quadratic in form, you are
not finished once you have found values for u. You then must replace u with the expression in x
and solve for x.

EXAMPLE 10

(

Solve: x +

Solving an Equation That Is Quadratic in Form

)

(

)

1 2
1
−6 x+
+ 8 = 0.
x
x

Solution

(

)

1
1 2
. Then u 2 = x +
. With this substitution, the original equation
x
x
becomes a quadratic equation in u.

We let u = x +

( x + 1x ) − 6( x + 1x ) + 8 = 0
2

u 2 − 6u + 8 = 0
( u − 2 )( u − 4 ) = 0

u − 2 = 0 or u − 4 = 0
u = 2 or
Replacing u with x +

u=4

Original equation
Replace x +

1
with u.
x

Factor.
Zero-product property
Solve for u.

1
in these equations, we have
x
1
1
x + = 2 or x + = 4.
x
x

Next, we solve each of these equations for x.
1
x+ =2
x
Multiply both sides by x (the LCD).
x 2 + 1 = 2x
x 2 − 2x + 1 = 0
( x − 1) 2 = 0

x −1= 0
x =1

Subtract 2 x from both sides; simplify.
Factor the perfect-square trinomial.
Square root property
Solve for x.

136

Chapter 1 Equations and Inequalities

Thus, x = 1 is a possible solution of the original equation. Now we solve:
1
= 4
x
x 2 + 1 = 4x
x+

x 2 − 4x + 1 =
x =

Multiply both sides by x (the LCD).

0

Subtract 4 x from both sides.

−( −4 ) ±

( − 4 ) 2 − 4 ( 1 )( 1 )

Quadratic formula:
a = 1, b = −4, c = 1

2( 1)

4 ± 12
2
4±2 3
x =
2
2 (2 ± 3)
x =
2
x =

x = 2±

Simplify.
12 =

4⋅3 =

4 3 = 2 3

Factor the numerator.

3.

Remove the common factor.

Thus, 2 + 3 and 2 − 3 are also possible solutions of the original equation. Consequently, the possible solutions of the original equation are 1, 2 + 3, and 2 − 3.
You should verify that 1, 2 + 3, and 2 − 3 are solutions of the original equation.
The solution set is {1, 2 − 3, 2 + 3 } .

(

Practice Problem 10. Solve: 1 +

)

(

)

1 2
1
−6 1+
+ 8 = 0.
x
x

The next example illustrates the paradoxical effect of time dilation when one travels at
speeds that are close to the speed of light.
Albert Einstein concluded in his “Special Theory of Relativity” that the closer we
come to traveling at the speed of light, the more time will slowdown for us relative to
someone not moving. Time dilation can be quantified by the equation
t0 = t 1 −

v2
c2

where t 0 = the “proper time” measured in the moving frame of reference
t = the time observed in the fixed frame of reference,
v = the speed of the moving frame of reference, and
c = the speed of light.
EXAMPLE 11

Investigating Space Travel (Your Older Sister Is
Younger Than You Are)

Your sister is five years older than you are. She decides that she has had enough of Earth
and needs a vacation. She takes a trip to the Omega-One star system. Her trip to OmegaOne and back in a spacecraft traveling at an average speed v took 15 years according to the
clock and calendar on the spacecraft. But upon landing back on Earth, she discovers that
her voyage took 25 years according to the time on Earth. This means that although you
were five years younger than your sister before her vacation, you are five years older than
her after her vacation! Use the time dilation equation t 0 = t 1 −
speed of the spacecraft.

v2
to calculate the
c2

Section 1.5 Solving Other Types of Equations

137

Solution
Substitute t 0 = 15 (moving-frame time) and t = 25 (fixed-frame time) to obtain
15 = 25 1 −

v2
c2

3
v2
= 1− 2
5
c
2
9
v
=1− 2
25
c
v2
9
=1−
c2
25
v 2
16
=
c
25

Divide both sides by 25;

15
3
= .
25
5

Square both sides.
Add

( )

v2
9
to both sides.
−
c2
25

Simplify.

v
4
= ±
c
5
v
4
=
c
5
4
v = c = 0.8c.
5

Square root property
Reject the negative value.
Multiply both sides by c.

Thus, the spacecraft must have been traveling at 80% of the speed of light ( 0.8c ) when
your sister found the “trip of youth.”
Practice Problem 11. Suppose your sister’s trip took 20 years according to the clock
and calendar on the spacecraft, but 25 years judging by time on Earth. Find the speed of
the spacecraft.

1.5

Exercises

Videos for
select exercises

Concepts and Vocabulary
1. If an apparent solution does not satisfy the equation, it is
called a(n)
solution.

13. x 3 + x = 0

14. x 3 − 1 = 0

2. When solving a rational equation, we multiply both sides
.
by the

15. x 4 − x 3 = x 2 − x

16. x 3 − 36 x = 16( x − 6 )

17. x 4

3. If x 3/ 4 = 8, then x =
4. If x 4 / 3

= 16, then x =

.
or x =

5. True or False. Rational equations always have extraneous
solutions.
6. True or False. If x 2 / 3 = k, then x = ± k 3 .
7. True or False. The equations x = 3 and x 2 = 9 have
identical solutions.
8. True or False. The first step in solving equations involving
radicals is to isolate one radical on one side of the equation.

Building Skills
In Exercises 9–18, find the real solutions of each equation by
factoring.
9. x 3 = 2 x 2
10. 3 x 4 − 27 x 2 = 0
11. ( x ) 3 =

x

12. ( x ) 5 = 16 x

.

= 27 x

18. 3 x 4 = 24 x

In Exercises 19–28, solve each equation by multiplying both
sides by the LCD.
19.

x+1
5x − 4
=
3x − 2
3x + 2

20.

x
3x + 2
=
2x + 1
4x + 3

21.

1
2
+
= 1
x
x+1

22.

x
x+1
+
= 1
x+1
x+2

23.

6x − 7
1
− 2 = 5
x
x

24.

1
2
3
+
+
=0
x
x+1
x+2

25.

1
1
7
+
=
x
x−3
3x − 5

26.

x+3
x+4
8x + 5
+
= 2
x −1
x+1
x −1

27.

5
4
2
13
−
+
=
x + 1 2x + 2
2x − 1
18

28.

6
1
2
−
=
+1
2x − 2
x+1
2x + 2

138

Chapter 1 Equations and Inequalities

In Exercises 29–36, solve each equation. Check your answers.
29.

x
5
10 x
−
= 2
x−5
x+5
x − 25

74. x 4 − 7 x 2 + 12 = 0
75. 2t 4 + t 2 − 1 = 0

x
4
8x
30.
−
= 2
x−4
x+4
x − 16
31.

73. x 4 − 13 x 2 + 36 = 0

76. 81y 4 + 1 = 18 y 2
77. p 2 − 3 + 4 p 2 − 3 − 5 = 0

x
3
6x
+
= 2
x−3
x+3
x −9

78. x 2 − 3 − 4 x 2 − 3 − 12 = 0

x
7
14 x
32.
+
= 2
x+7
x−7
x − 49

79. (3t + 1) 2 − 3( 3t + 1 ) + 2 = 0

33.

1
x
4
+
= 2
x −1
x+3
x + 2x − 3

80. (7 z + 5) 2 + 2 ( 7 z + 5 ) − 15 = 0

34.

x
2
10
+
= − 2
x−2
x+3
x + x−6

82. (2 t + 1) 2 − 2 ( 2 t + 1 ) − 3 = 0

81. ( y + 5) 2 − 9( y + 5 ) + 20 = 0

83. ( x 2 − 4) 2 − 3( x 2 − 4 ) − 4 = 0

2x
x
14
35.
+
= 2
x+3
x −1
x + 2x − 3
36.

84. ( x 2 − 1) 2 − 11( x 2 − 1 ) + 24 = 0

2 ( x + 1)
x
9
−
= 2
x−2
x+1
x −x−2

85. ( x 2 − 3 x ) 2 − 2 ( x 2 − 3 x ) − 8 = 0

In Exercises 37–58, solve each equation. Check your answers.
37. 3 3 x − 1 = 2
38. 3 2 x + 3 = 3
39.

x − 1 = −2

41. x +

40.

x+6 = 0

3 x + 4 = −1

42. x −

6x + 7 = 0

43.

y+6 = y

44. r + 11 = 6 r + 3

45.

6 y − 11 = 2 y − 7

46.

3y + 1 = y − 1

48.

5 x 2 − 10 x + 9 = 2 x − 1

47. t −

3t + 6 = −2

49.

x−3 =

2x − 5 − 1

51.

2y + 9 = 2 +

53.

50. x +

x+1 = 5

y + 1 52.

m −1 =

m−5

7z + 1 −

5z + 4 = 1 54.

3q + 1 −

q −1 = 2

55.

2x + 5 +

x + 6 = 3 56.

5x − 9 −

x+4 = 1

57.

2x − 5 −

x−3 = 1

3x + 5 +

6x + 3 = 3

58.

In Exercises 59–62, solve each equation. Check your answers.
59. ( x − 4) 3/ 2 = 27
60. ( x + 7) 3/ 2 = 64
61. (5 x − 3) 2 / 3 − 5 = 4

62. (2 x − 6) 2 / 3 + 9 = 13

In Exercises 63–86, solve each equation by using an appropriate substitution. Check your answers.
63. x − 5 x + 6 = 0
64. x − 3 x + 2 = 0
65. 2 y − 15 y = −7
66. y + 44 = 15 y
67. x −2 − x −1 − 42 = 0
68. x 1/ 2 + 3 − 4 x −1/ 2 = 0
69. x 2/3 − 6 x 1/3 + 8 = 0
70. x 2/ 5 + x 1/ 5 − 2 = 0
71. 2 x 1/ 2 + 3 x 1/ 4 − 2 =
72. 2 x 1/ 2 − x 1/ 4 − 1 = 0

0

86. ( x 2 − 4 x ) 2 + 7( x 2 − 4 x ) + 12 = 0

Applying the Concepts
87. Work efficiency. Working together, Todrick and his brother
can finish laying concrete blocks in 2 days. If each works
alone, Todrick’s brother takes 3 more days than it would take
Todrick to do the job. How long would it take each of them
working alone to finish the job?
88. Work efficiency. Working together, Celeste and Jacob
shovel the snow from their driveway in 6 hours. It takes
Jacob five hours more than Celeste to do the job alone.
How long would it take each of them working alone to
finish the job?
89. Pressure in a hose. The pressure in a sprinkler hose t seconds after being turned on is modeled by the equation
p = 63 + t + 40 psi. At what time will the pressure be
70 psi?
90. Geometric dimensions. Find the dimensions of a rectangle
with an area of 12 sq ft and a diagonal of 5 ft.
91. Fractions. The numerator of a fraction is two less than the
25
denominator. The sum of the fraction and its reciprocal is .
12
Find the numerator and denominator assuming that each is a
positive integer.
92. Fractions. The numerator of a fraction is five less than the
denominator. The sum of the fraction and six times its
25
reciprocal is . Find the numerator and denominator,
2
assuming that each is an integer.
93. Investment. Latasha bought some stock for $1800. If the
price of each share of the stock had been $18 less, she could
have bought five more shares for the same $1800.
a. How many shares of the stock did she buy?
b. How much did she pay for each share?
94. Bus charter. A civic club charters a bus for one day at a cost
of $575. When two more people join the group, each person’s
cost decreases by $2. How many people were in the original
group?

Section 1.5 Solving Other Types of Equations
95. Depth of a well. A stone is dropped into a well, and the time
it takes to hear the splash is 4 seconds. Find the depth of the
well (to the nearest foot). Assume that the speed of sound is
1100 feet per second and that d = 16t 2 is the distance d an
object falls in t seconds.
96. Estimating the horizon. You are in a hot air balloon 2 miles
above the ocean. (See the accompanying diagram.) As far as
you can see, there is only water. Given that the radius of the
earth is 3960 miles, how far away is the horizon?
2 mi

3960 mi

139

to model the time dilation phenomenon related to traveling at
nearly the speed of light (see page 136 for details).
102. Fountain of Youth. You want to design the spacecraft that
would make you younger (in relation to people on Earth).
For 1 year of space travel you want to gain 2 years on Earth.
Calculate how fast your spacecraft should be.
103. Antares Supernova. Antares is a red supergiant star with
diameter about 700 times the Sun’s diameter. It’s located in
the Scorpius constellation approximately 550 light-years
away from the Sun. It is estimated that Antares will explode
as a supernova within the next 10,000 years and be as bright
as a full moon and easily visible in daytime. An astronomer
plans to board a spacecraft and travel for 20 years and land
back on Earth hoping to see the Antares supernova. Calculate
how fast the spacecraft should be.

97. Rate of current. A motorboat is capable of traveling at a speed
of 10 miles per hour in still water. On a particular day, the boat
took 30 minutes longer to travel a distance of 12 miles upstream
than it took to travel the same distance downstream. What was
the rate of the current in the stream on that day?
1
	  98. Train speed. A freight train requires 2 hours longer to
2
make a 300-mile journey than an express train does. If the
express train averages 20 miles per hour faster than the
freight train, how long does it take the express train to make
the trip?

	  99. Washing the family car. A couple washed the family car
in 24 minutes. Previously, when they each had washed the
car alone, it took the husband 20 minutes longer to wash the
car than it took the wife. How long did it take the wife to
wash the car?
100. Filling a swimming pool. A small swimming pool can
be filled by two hoses together in 1 hour and 12 minutes.
The larger hose alone fills the pool in 1 hour less than the
smaller hose. How long does it take the smaller hose to fill
the pool?
101. The area of a rectangular plot. Together the diagonal and
the longer side of a rectangular plot are three times the length
of the shorter side. If the longer side exceeds the shorter side
by 100 feet, what is the area of the plot?
In Exercises 102 and 103, use the equation
t0 = t 1 −

v2
c2

104. Emergency at sea. You are at sea in your motorboat
at a point A located 40 km from a point B that lies
130 kilometers from a hospital on a long, straight road.
(See the accompanying figure.) While at point A, your
companion feels sick and has to be taken to the hospital.
You call the hospital on your cell phone to send an ambulance. Your motorboat can travel at 40 kilometers per hour,
and the ambulance can travel at 80 kilometers per hour.
How far from point B will you be when you and the
ambulance arrive simultaneously at point C?

A
40
130 2 x

x
B

C

Hospital

105. Planning road construction. Two towns A and B are
located 8 and 5 miles, respectively, from a long, straight
highway. The points C and D on the highway closest to the
two towns are 18 miles apart. (Remember that the shortest
distance from a point to a line is the length of the perpendicular segment from the point to the line.) Where should

140

Chapter 1 Equations and Inequalities
point E be located on the highway so that the sum of the
lengths of the roads from A to E and E to B is 23 miles?
(See the accompanying figure.)
[Hint: 205 x 2 − 4392 x + 18972 = ( x − 6 )( 205 x − 3162 ).]

A

112.

( x + x1 ) − 7( x − 1x ) + 8 = 0
2

2

 Hint: u = x − 1 , u 2 + 2 = x 2 + 1 . 

x
x 2 
2
t
2t
113.
+
− 15 = 0
t +2
t +2

(

)

114. 2 x 1/ 3 + 2 x −1/ 3 − 5 = 0
B

8 mi

115. x 4 / 3 − 4 x 2 / 3 + 3 = 0
5 mi

E

C

18 2 x

x

x
−
x+3

116. 8

D

106. Department store purchases. A department store buyer
purchased some shirts for $540. Then she sold all but eight
of them. On each shirt sold, a profit of $6 (over the purchase
price) was made. The shirts sold brought in revenue of $780.
a. How many shirts were bought initially?
b. What was the purchase price of each shirt?
c. What was the selling price of each shirt?

x+3
= 2
x

In Exercises 117 and 118, solve for x in terms of the other variables. (All letters denote positive real numbers.)
117.

x+b
x − 5b
=
x−b
2 x − 5b

118. 3a −

ax =

a( 3x + a )

Critical Thinking / Discussion / Writing

Beyond the Basics

In Exercises 119–121, find the value of x.

In Exercises 107–116, solve each equation by any method.

119. x =

x2 − 3 2

x2 − 3

x

x

107.

(

) −6(

)+8 = 0

108.

( 3xx ++ 21 ) − 5 ( 3xx ++ 21 ) + 6 = 0

109.

3x − 2 + 2 4 x + 1 = 2 2

2

110.

5
3x
9
−
= 2
x −1
x+1
x −1

111.

x+2
2x + 6
1
+ 2
= −
x
x + 4x
x+4

1+

1+

1+

[ Hint: x = 1 + x . ]
120. x =

20 +

121. x = n +
integer.

20 +
n+

20 + 
n +  , where n is a positive

122. Assume that x > 1. Solve for x.
x + 2 x −1 +

x − 2 x −1 = 4

[Hint: x + 2 x − 1 = ( x − 1 ) + 1 + 2 x − 1
2

= ( x − 1 + 1 ) .]

GETTING READY

for the Next Section

REVIEW CONCEPTS

GR9. 2( x − 3 ) + 17 = 4 x + 1

Inequalities (Section P.1, pages 6–7)

GR10. 2 x + 3( x − 4 ) = 7 x + 10

Interval and set notations (Section P.1, pages 8-9)

GR11. 2 x − 3 − ( 3 x − 1 ) = 6

REVIEW SKILLS

GR12.

Inequality symbols (Section P.1, page 6)
In Exercises GR1–GR7, use inequality symbols to write the
statement symbolically.
GR1. 5 is greater than −1.

Arithmetic of rational expressions (Section P.5, pages 51–55)
In Exercises GR13–GR16, perform the indicated operations,
factoring all denominators.

GR2. −4 is less than −1.
GR3. 7 is greater than or equal to 7.
GR4. 2 x is less than 2 x + 5.
GR5. 3 is greater than 3 x + 4.
GR6. x − 1 is less than or equal to 2.

GR13.

5
+3
2x

GR14. 6 x +

5
x−3

GR15.

3
x−2
−
x+1
x+3

GR16.

x
x−3
− 2
x 2 + 6x + 9
x + 5x + 6

GR7. x is nonnegative.
Solve linear equations. (Section 1.1, pages 82–84)
In Exercises GR8–GR12, solve each equation.
GR8. 12 x − 4 = 28 − 4 x

−2 x
x
= x+
3
2

Section 1.6 Inequalities

1.6

141

Inequalities
Objectives

Videos for
this Section

1

Learn the vocabulary for discussing inequalities.

2

Solve and graph linear inequalities.

3

Solve and graph a compound inequality.

4

Solve polynomial and rational inequalities using test points.

The Bermuda Triangle
The Bermuda Triangle, or Devil’s Triangle, is the
expanse of the Atlantic Ocean between Florida,
Bermuda, and Puerto Rico covering approximately 500,000 square miles of sea. This mysterious
stretch of sea has an unusually high occurrence of
disappearing ships and planes.
For example, on Halloween 1991, pilot John
Verdi and his copilot were flying a Grumman
Cougar jet over the triangle. They radioed the
nearest tower to get permission to increase their
altitude. The tower agreed and watched as the jet
began the ascent and then disappeared off the
radar. The jet did not fly out of range of the radar, did not descend, and did not radio a mayday
(distress call). It just vanished, and the plane and crew were never recovered.
One explanation for such disappearances is based on the theory that strange compass
readings occur in crossing the Atlantic due to confusion caused by the three north poles: magnetic (toward which compasses point), grid (the real North Pole, at 90 degrees latitude), and true
or celestial north (determined by Polaris, the North Star). To get data to test this theory, a plane
set out from Miami to Bermuda, a distance of 1035 miles, with the intention of setting the plane on
automatic pilot once it reached a cruising speed of 300 miles per hour.
The plane was 150 miles along its path from Miami to Bermuda when it reached the 300-mileper-hour cruising speed and was set on automatic pilot. After what length of time would you be
confident in saying that the plane had encountered trouble? The answer to this question is found
in Example 2, which uses a linear inequality, the topic discussed in this section.

Objective 1

Inequalities
When we replace the equal sign ( = ) in an equation with any of the four inequality symbols
<, ≤, >, or ≥, the resulting expression is an inequality. Here are some examples.
Equation
x = 5
3 x + 2 = 14
5 x + 7 = 3 x + 23
x2

= 0

Replace = with
<
≤
>
≥

Inequality
x < 5
3 x + 2 ≤ 14
5 x + 7 > 3 x + 23
x2 ≥ 0

142

Chapter 1 Equations and Inequalities

In general, an inequality is a statement that one algebraic expression is either less than or
is less than or equal to another algebraic expression. The vocabulary for discussing inequalities is similar to that used for equations. The domain of a variable in an inequality is the
set of all real numbers for which both sides of the inequality are defined. The real numbers
that result in a true statement when those numbers are substituted for the variable in the
inequality are called solutions of the inequality. Because replacing x with 1 in the inequality 3 x + 2 ≤ 14 results in the true statement
3( 1 ) + 2 ≤ 14,
the number 1 is a solution of the inequality 3 x + 2 ≤ 14. We also say that 1 satisfies
the inequality 3 x + 2 ≤ 14. To solve an inequality means to find all solutions of the
inequality — that is, its solution set. The most elementary equations, such as x = 5, have
only one solution. However, even the most elementary inequalities, such as x < 5, have
infinitely many solutions. In fact, their solution sets are intervals, and we frequently graph
the solution sets for inequalities in one variable on a number line. The graph of the inequality x < 5 is the interval ( −∞, 5 ), shown in Figure 1.6.

5
x

Figure 1.6

5, or (2`, 5)

Graph of an inequality

Inequalities are classified the same way as equations: conditional, inconsistent, or
identities. A conditional inequality such as x < 5 has in its domain at least one solution
and at least one number that is not a solution. An inequality that no real number satisfies is
called an inconsistent inequality. The solution set of an inconsistent inequality is designated by the empty set symbol ∅. An inequality that is satisfied by every real number in the
domain of the variable is called an identity.
Because x 2 = x ⋅ x is the product of (1) two positive factors, (2) two negative factors,
or (3) two zero factors, x 2 is either a positive number or zero. That is, x 2 is never negative,
or is nonnegative. We call this fact the nonnegative identity.
Nonnegative Identity
x2 ≥ 0
for any real number x.

It follows from the nonnegative identity that the inequality x 2 < − 2 is an inconsistent
inequality. Two inequalities that have exactly the same solution set are called equivalent
inequalities. The basic method of solving inequalities is similar to the method for solving
equations: We replace a given inequality with a series of equivalent inequalities until we
arrive at an equivalent inequality, such as x < 5, whose solution set we already know.

The following operations produce equivalent inequalities:
1. Simplifying one or both sides of an inequality by combining like terms and
eliminating parentheses
2. Adding or subtracting the same expression on both sides of the inequality

Section 1.6 Inequalities

SIDE NOTE
On the number line a < b
corresponds to the point a
being to the left of the point b.

143

Caution is required in multiplying or dividing both sides of an inequality by a real
number or an expression representing a real number. Notice what happens when we multiply an inequality by −1.
We know that 2 < 3, but how does −2 = ( −1 )( 2 ) compare with −3 = ( −1 )( 3 )?
We have −2 > −3. See Figure 1.7.

23
22
23 is left of 22

21

0

1

2
3
2 is left of 3

Figure 1.7

If we multiply (or divide) both sides of the inequality 2 < 3 by −1, to get a correct
result, we must exchange the < symbol for the > symbol. This exchange of symbols is
called reversing the sense or the direction of the inequality.
The following chart describes the way multiplication and division affect inequalities.

If C represents a real number, then the following inequalities are all equivalent.
Sign of C

Inequality

Sense

Example

A < B

<

3 x < 12

C positive

A⋅C < B⋅C

Unchanged

C positive

A
B
<
C
C

Unchanged

C negative

A⋅C > B⋅C

Reversed

1
1
− ( 3 x ) > − ( 12 )
3
3

C negative

A
B
>
C
C

Reversed

3x
12
>
−3
−3

1( )
1
3 x < ( 12 )
3
3
3x
12
<
3
3

Similar results apply when < is replaced throughout with any of the symbols ≤, >,
or ≥.

Objective 2

Linear Inequalities
A linear inequality in one variable is an inequality that is equivalent to one of the forms
ax + b < 0

or

ax + b ≤ 0,

where a and b represent real numbers and a ≠ 0.
Inequalities such as 2 x − 1 > 0 and 2 x − 1 ≥ 0 are linear inequalities because they
are equivalent to −2 x + 1 < 0 and −2 x + 1 ≤ 0, respectively.
SIDE NOTE
A linear inequality becomes
a linear equation when the
inequality symbol is replaced
with the equal sign ( = ).

EXAMPLE 1

Solving and Graphing Linear Inequalities

Solve each inequality and graph its solution set.
a. 2 x < −2    b. 7 x − 11 < 2 ( x − 3 )   c. 8 − 3 x ≥ 2
Solution
a. 2 x < −2

262524 232221 0 1 2
x

Figure 1.8

21, or (2`, 21)

x < −1

Divide both sides by 2.

The solution set is {x x < −1} or, in interval notation, ( −∞, −1 ). The graph is shown
in Figure 1.8.

144

Chapter 1 Equations and Inequalities

b. 7 x − 11 < 2 ( x − 3 )
7 x − 11 < 2 x − 6

Distributive property

7 x − 11 + 11 < 2 x − 6 + 11

Add 11 to both sides.

7x < 2x + 5

Simplify.

7x − 2x < 2x + 5 − 2x
5x < 5
24 23 22 21 0 1 2 3
x 1, or (2`, 1)

Simplify.

5x
5
<
5
5
x <1

4

Subtract 2 x from both sides.
Divide both sides by 5.
Simplify.

Figure 1.9

The solution set is {x x < 1} or, in interval notation, ( −∞, 1 ). The graph of the solution set is shown in Figure 1.9.
c. 8 − 3 x ≥ 2
8 − 3x − 8 ≥ 2 − 8

0

22 21
x

1 2 3 4
2, or (2`, 2]

5

− 3 x ≥ −6

Simplify.

−3 x
−6
≤
−3
−3

Divide both sides by −3. (Reverse the
direction of the inequality symbol.)

x ≤ 2

Figure 1.10

Subtract 8 from both sides.

Simplify.

The solution set is {x x ≤ 2} or, in interval notation, ( −∞, 2 ]. The graph of the solution set is shown in Figure 1.10.
Practice Problem 1. Solve each inequality and graph the solution set.
a. 3 x + 1 ≤ 10   b. 4 x + 9 > 2 ( x + 6 ) + 1   c. 7 − 2 x ≥ −3	
EXAMPLE 2

Calculating the Results of the Bermuda Triangle Experiment

In the introduction to this section, we discussed an experiment to test the reliability of compass settings and flight by automatic pilot along one edge of the Bermuda Triangle. The
plane is 150 miles along its path from Miami to Bermuda, cruising at 300 miles per hour,
when it notifies the tower that it is now set on automatic pilot.
The entire trip is 1035 miles, and we want to determine how much time we should let
pass before we become concerned that the plane has encountered trouble.
Solution
Let t = time elapsed since the plane went on autopilot. Then
300t = distance the plane has flown in t hours
150 + 300t = plane’s distance from Miami after t hours.
Concern is not warranted unless the Bermuda tower does not see the plane, which
means that the following is true.
Plane’s distance from Miami ≥ Distance from Miami to Bermuda
150 + 300t ≥ 1035

Replace the verbal description
with an inequality.

150 + 300t − 150 ≥ 1035 − 150

Subtract 150 from both sides.

300t ≥ 885
300t
885
≥
300
300
t ≥ 2.95

Simplify.
Divide both sides by 300.
Simplify.

Section 1.6 Inequalities

145

Because 2.95 is roughly three hours, the tower will suspect trouble if the plane has not
arrived in Bermuda after three hours.
Practice Problem 2. How much time should pass in Example 2 if the plane was set on
automatic pilot at 340 miles per hour when it was 185 miles from Miami?
If an inequality is true for all real numbers, its solution set is ( −∞, ∞ ). If an inequality
has no solution, its solution set is ∅.
EXAMPLE 3

Solving an Inequality

Write the solution set of each inequality.
a. 7 ( x + 2 ) − 20 − 4 x < 3( x − 1 )  b. 2 ( x + 5 ) + 3 x < 5( x − 1) + 3
Solution
a. 7 ( x + 2 ) − 20 − 4 x < 3( x − 1 )

Original inequality

7 x + 14 − 20 − 4 x < 3 x − 3

Distributive property

3x − 6 < 3x − 3

Combine like terms.

−6 < −3

Add −3 x to both sides and simplify.

The last inequality is equivalent to the original inequality and is always true. So the
solution set of the original inequality is ( −∞, ∞ ).
2
Original inequality
b. ( x + 5 ) + 3 x < 5( x − 1 ) + 3
2 x + 10 + 3 x < 5 x − 5 + 3
Distributive property
5 x + 10 < 5 x − 2

Combine like terms.

10 < −2

Add −5 x and simplify.

The resulting inequality is equivalent to the original inequality and is always false. So
the solution set of the original inequality is ∅.
Practice Problem 3. Write the solution set of each inequality.
a. 2 ( 4 − x ) + 6 x < 4 ( x + 1 ) + 7 b. 3( x − 2 ) + 5 ≥ 7 ( x − 1 ) − 4 ( x − 2 )

Objective 3

Combining Two Inequalities
Sometimes we are interested in the solution set of two or more inequalities. The combination of two or more inequalities is called a compound inequality.
Suppose E1 is an inequality with solution set (interval) I 1 and E 2 is another inequality
with solution set I 2 . Then the solution set of the compound inequality “E1 and E 2” is
I 1 ∩ I 2 and the solution set of the compound inequality “E1 or E 2” is I 1 ∪ I 2 .
EXAMPLE 4

Solving and Graphing a Compound OR Inequality

Graph and write the solution set of the compound inequality.
2 x + 7 ≤ 1 or 3 x − 2 < 4 ( x − 1 )
Solution
2x + 7 ≤ 1

or 3 x − 2 < 4 ( x − 1 )

Original inequalities

2x + 7 ≤ 1

or 3 x − 2 < 4 x − 4

Distributive property

2 x ≤ −6 or

−x < −2

x ≤ −3 or

x > 2

Isolate variable term.
Solve for x; reverse second
inequality symbol.

146

Chapter 1 Equations and Inequalities

Graph each inequality and select the union of the two intervals.
x ≤ −3
25

24

23

22

21

0

1

2

3

4

5

25

24

23

22

21

0

1

2

3

4

5

25

24

23

22

21

0

1

2

3

4

5

x > 2
x ≤ −3 or

x > 2

The solution set of the compound inequality is ( −∞, − 3 ] ∪ ( 2, ∞ ).
Practice Problem 4. Write the solution set of the compound inequality.
3 x − 5 ≥ 7 or 5 − 2 x ≥ 1
EXAMPLE 5

Solving and Graphing a Compound AND Inequality

Solve the compound inequality and graph the solution set.
2 ( x − 3 ) + 5 < 9 and 3( 1 − x ) − 2 ≤ 7
Solution
2( x − 3 ) + 5 < 9

and 3( 1 − x ) − 2 x ≤ 7

Original inequalities

and

3 − 3x − 2 ≤ 7

Distributive property

2 x < 10 and

−3 x ≤ 6

Isolate variable term.

2x − 6 + 5 < 9
x < 5

and

x ≥ −2

Solve for x; reverse second
inequality symbol.

Graph each inequality and select the interval common to both inequalities.
x < 5
27 26 25 24 23 22 21

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

27 26 25 24 23 22 21

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

27 26 25 24 23 22 21

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

x ≥ −2
x < 5 and

x ≥ −2

The solution set of the compound inequality is the interval [ −2, 5 ).
Practice Problem 5. Solve and graph the compound inequality.
2 ( 3 − x ) − 3 < 5 and 2 ( x − 5 ) + 7 ≤ 3
Sometimes we are interested in a joint inequality such as −5 < 2 x + 3 ≤ 9. This use of
two inequality symbols in a single expression is shorthand for −5 < 2 x + 3 and
2 x + 3 ≤ 9. Fortunately, solving such inequalities requires no new principles, as we see
in the next example.
EXAMPLE 6

Solving and Graphing a Compound Inequality

Solve the inequality −5 < 2 x + 3 ≤ 9 and graph its solution set.

Section 1.6 Inequalities

147

Solution
We must find all real numbers that are solutions of both inequalities
−5 < 2 x + 3 and 2 x + 3 ≤ 9.
We first solve these inequalities separately.
−5 < 2 x + 3

2x + 3 ≤ 9

−5 − 3 < 2 x + 3 − 3

2x + 3 − 3 ≤ 9 − 3

−8 < 2 x

2x ≤ 6

−8
2x
<
2
2
−4 < x

2x
6
≤
2
2
x ≤ 3

Original inequalities
Subtract 3 from both sides.
Simplify.
Divide both sides by 2.
Simplify.

The solution of the original pair of inequalities consists of all real numbers x such that
−4 < x and x ≤ 3. This solution may be written more compactly as {x − 4 < x ≤ 3}.
In interval notation, we write ( −4, 3 ]. The graph is shown in Figure 1.11.

24

23

22 21
24 x

0
1
2
3, or (24, 3]

3

4

Figure 1.11

Notice that we did the same thing to both inequalities in each step of the solution process.
We can accomplish this simultaneous solution more efficiently by working on both
inequalities at the same time, as follows.
−5 < 2 x + 3 ≤ 9
−5 − 3 < 2 x + 3 − 3 ≤ 9 − 3
−8 < 2 x ≤ 6

Original inequality
Subtract 3 from each part.
Simplify each part.

−8
2x
6
<
≤
2
2
2
−4 < x ≤ 3

Divide each part by 2.
Simplify each part.

The solution set is ( −4, 3 ], the same solution set we found previously.
Practice Problem 6. Solve and graph −6 ≤ 4 x − 2 < 4.
EXAMPLE 7

Finding the Interval of Values for a Linear Expression

If −2 < x < 5, find real numbers a and b so that a < 3 x − 1 < b.
Solution
We start with the interval for x.
−2 < x < 5
3( −2 ) < 3 x < 3( 5 )
−6 < 3 x < 15
−6 − 1 < 3 x − 1 < 15 − 1
−7 < 3 x − 1 < 14
We have a = −7 and b = 14.

Multiply each part by 3 to get 3 x in the middle.
Simplify.
Subtract 1 from each part to get 3 x − 1 in the middle.
Simplify.

148

Chapter 1 Equations and Inequalities

Practice Problem 7. Assuming that −3 ≤ x ≤ 2, find real numbers a and b so that
a ≤ 3 x + 5 ≤ b.
Our next example demonstrates a practical use of the method shown in Example 7.
EXAMPLE 8

Finding a Fahrenheit Temperature from a Celsius Range

The weather in London is predicted to range between 10 ° and 20 ° Celsius during the threeweek period you will be working there. To decide what kind of clothes to take, you want to
convert the temperature range to Fahrenheit temperatures. The formula for converting
9
Celsius temperature C to Fahrenheit temperature F is F = C + 32. What range of
5
Fahrenheit temperatures might you find in London during your stay there?
Solution
First, we express the Celsius temperature range as an inequality. Let C = temperature in
degrees Celsius.
For the three weeks under consideration, 10 ≤ C ≤ 20.
9
We want to know the range of F = C + 32 when 10 ≤ C ≤ 20.
5
10 ≤ C ≤ 20
9 ( )
9
9 ( )
9
10 ≤ C ≤
20
Multiply each part by .
5
5
5
5
9
18 ≤ C ≤ 36
Simplify.
5
9
18 + 32 ≤ C + 32 ≤ 36 + 32
Add 32 to each part.
5
9
50 ≤ C + 32 ≤ 68
Simplify.
5
9
50 ≤ F ≤ 68
F = C + 32
5

( )

( )

So the temperature range from 10 ° to 20 ° Celsius corresponds to a range from 50 ° to
68 ° Fahrenheit.
Practice Problem 8. What range in degrees Fahrenheit corresponds to the range of
15 ° to 25 ° Celsius?

Objective 4

Using Test Points to Solve Inequalities
The test-point method, also known as the sign-chart method, involves writing an inequality (by rearranging if necessary) so that the expression on the left side of the inequality
symbol is in factored form and the right side is 0. In Example 9, we illustrate this method
to solve a quadratic inequality.

PROCEDURE IN ACTION
EXAMPLE 9

Using the Test-Point Method to Solve an Inequality

Objective

Example

Solve an inequality by using the test-point
method.
Step 1 Rewrite (if necessary) the inequality
so that the right side of the inequality is 0.

Solve: x 2 + 4 x ≥ 5 x + 6.

Simplify the left side.

1. x 2 + 4 x − 5 x − 6 ≥ 0
x2 − x − 6 ≥ 0

Subtract 5 x + 6 from both sides.
Simplify.

Section 1.6 Inequalities

Step 2

2. ( x + 2 )( x − 3 ) ≥ 0

Factor the left side.

Step 3 Draw a number line. Find and plot
the points where each factor is 0.

149

Factor.

3. x + 2 = 0 for x = −2, and x − 3 = 0 for x = 3.

The n points so obtained divide the number
line into ( n + 1 ) intervals.

23

22

0

21

1

3

2

4

The three intervals determined by the two points −2 and 3 are
( −∞, −2 ), ( −2, 3 ), and ( 3, ∞ ).

Step 4 The final expression on the left
side of the inequality in Step 1 is always
positive or always negative on each of the
( n + 1 ) intervals of Step 3. Select convenient “test points” in each interval to
determine the sign of the inequality.

4.

Step 5 Draw a sign chart. Show the
information from Steps 3 and 4 on a number
line.

5.

Test Interval

−3
0
4

( −2, 3 )
( 3, ∞ )

Result

( − )( − )

Positive
Negative
Positive

( + )( − )
( + )( + )

x22x26 = (x 1 2)(x 2 3)
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0

2

22

21

23

Step 6 From the sign chart in Step 5, write
the solution set of the inequality. Graph the
solution set.

Sign of ( x + 2 )( x − 3 )

Test Point

( −∞, −2 )

2

2

2
1

0

2

0 1 1 1 1 1

2

3

4

6. To find where x 2 − x − 6 ≥ 0 means to find where
x 2 − x − 6 > 0 (indicated by + signs) or x 2 − x − 6 = 0
(indicated by 0) on the sign chart. The solution set of the inequality from the figure in Step 5 is ( −∞, −2 ] ∪ [ 3, ∞ ). This set is
shown below.
3

22

Practice Problem 9. Solve: x 2 + 2 < 3 x + 6.
A rational inequality is an inequality that includes one or more rational expressions. We
use the test-point method to solve a rational inequality.
EXAMPLE 10

Solving a Rational Inequality

x 2 + 2 x − 15
≥ 3.
x −1
x 2 + 2 x − 15
−3 ≥ 0
Step 1
x −1
x 2 + 2 x − 15 3( x − 1 )
−
≥ 0
x −1
x −1
Solve:

Rearrange so that the right side is 0.
Common denominator

( x 2 + 2 x − 15 ) − 3 ( x − 1 )

Step 2
Step 3

a
b
a±b
≥ 0
± =
x −1
c
c
c
x 2 + 2 x − 15 − 3 x + 3
Distribute.
≥ 0
x −1
x 2 − x − 12
≥ 0
Simplify.
x −1
( x + 3 )( x − 4 )
≥ 0
Factor the numerator.
x −1
x + 3 = 0 for x = −3
x − 4 = 0 for x = 4
x − 1 = 0 for x = 1
24

23

The rational expression is undefined at x = 1.
22

21

0

1

2

3

4

5

150

Chapter 1 Equations and Inequalities

The four intervals determined by the three points −3, 1, and 4 are
( −∞, −3 ) , ( − 3, 1 ) , ( 1, 4 ) , and ( 4, ∞ ) .

Step 4
Test Interval

Test Point

( −∞, −3 )

−4

( −3, 1 )

0

( 1, 4 )

2

( 4, ∞ )

5

Sign of

( x + 3 )( x − 4 )
( x − 1)
( − )( − )
( + )( − )

24

( + )( − )

Negative

(+)
( + )( + )

Positive

(+)

1

23

( x + 3 )( x − 4 )
( x − 1)

24

1

22

1

1

21

1

2

1

0

2

2

3

2

0 1 1 1 1 1 1
4

5

≥ 0 on the set [ −3, 1 ) ∪ [ 4, ∞ ), with the following graph:
23

22

Practice Problem 10. Solve:

1.6

Positive

(−)

undefined

(x 1 3) (x 2 4)
2 2 2 2 20
x21

WARNING

Negative

(−)

Step 5

Step 6

Result

21

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

2x + 5
≤ 1.
x −1

You cannot solve a rational inequality by multiplying both sides by the LCD, as you would with a
rational equation. Remember that you reverse the sense of an inequality when multiplying by a
negative expression. However, when an expression contains a variable, you do not know whether
the expression is positive or negative.

Exercises

Videos for
select exercises

Concepts and Vocabulary
In Exercises 1–4, fill in the blank with the correct inequality
symbol, using the rules for producing equivalent inequalities.
1. If x < 8, then x − 8
0.
2. If x ≤ −3, then x + 3
0.
x
3. If < 6, then x
12.
2
x
4. If < −2, then x
−6.
3
5. True or False. If −2 x ≤ 4, then 2 x ≥ −4.

8. True or False. Every real number is a solution of the
inequality −5 x ≤ x.

Building Skills
In Exercises 9–18, graph the solution set of each inequality
and write it in interval notation.
9. −2 < x < 5
10. −5 ≤ x ≤ 0
11. 0 < x ≤ 4

12. 1 ≤ x < 7

6. True or False. One solution of the inequality −3 x ≥ 12
is −4.

13. x ≥ −1

14. x > 2

15. −5 x ≥ 10

16. −2 x < 2

7. True or False. One solution of the inequality x ≥ 7
is 7.001.

17. 2 x − 3 > −5

18. 5 x + 1 ≤ 16

Section 1.6 Inequalities
In Exercises 19–40, solve each inequality. Write the solution in
interval notation and graph the solution set.
19. x + 3 < 6
20. x − 2 < 3

In Exercises 67–78, solve each compound inequality.
	  67. 3 < x + 5 < 4
68. 9 ≤ x + 7 ≤ 12
	  69. −4 ≤ x − 2 < 2

70. −3 < x + 5 < 4

21. 1 − x ≤ 4

22. 7 − x > 3

23. 2 x + 5 < 9

24. 3 x + 2 ≥ 7

25. 3 − 3 x > 15

26. 8 − 4 x ≥ 12

27. 3( x + 2 ) < 2 x + 5

28. 4 ( x − 1 ) ≥ 3 x − 1

29. 3( x − 3 ) ≤ 3 − x

30. −x − 2 ≥ x − 10

	  71. −9 ≤ 2 x + 3 ≤ 5
x
	  73. 0 ≤ 1 − < 2
3
2x − 3
	  75. −1 <
≤ 0
5
	  77. 5 x ≤ 3 x + 1 < 4 x − 2

72. −2 ≤ 3 x + 1 ≤ 7
x
74. 0 < 5 − ≤ 3
2
5x − 2
76. −4 ≤
≤ 0
3

31. 6 x + 4 > 3 x + 10

32. 4 ( x − 4 ) > 3( x − 5 )

	  78. 3 x + 2 < 2 x + 3 < 4 x − 1

33. 8( x − 1 ) − x ≤ 7 x − 12
34. 3( x + 2 ) + 2 x ≥ 5 x + 18
35. 5( x + 2 ) ≤ 3( x + 1 ) + 10
36. x − 4 > 2 ( x + 8 )
37. 2 ( x + 1 ) + 3 ≥ 2 ( x + 2 ) − 1
38. 5( 2 − x ) + 4 x ≤ 12 − x

151

In Exercises 79–84, find a and b.
79. If −2 < x < 1, then a < x + 7 < b.
80. If 1 < x < 5, then a < 2 x + 3 < b.
81. If −1 < x < 1, then a < 2 − x < b.
82. If 3 < x < 7, then a < 1 − 3 x < b.

39. 2 ( x + 1 ) − 2 ≤ 3( 2 − x ) + 9

83. If 0 < x < 4, then a < 5 x − 1 < b.

40. 4 ( 1 − x ) + 2 x > 5( 2 − x ) + 4 x

84. If −4 < x < 0, then a < 3 x + 4 < b.

In Exercises 41–50, solve each rational inequality.
3
7x − 3
42.
41. 9 x − 6 ≥ x + 9
< 3x − 4
2
2
x−3
x
2x − 3
x
43.
44.
≤ 2+
≥ 3−
2
2
3
4
3x + 1
x
2x − 1
x+1
x
45.
< x −1+
46.
≥
+
2
2
3
4
12
x−3
x
2x + 1
x −1
1
47.
48.
<
+
≥ +1
2
3
3
2
6
3x + 1
x
x+2
x −1
x+1
x
x
49.
− ≤
50.
+
≤ +
3
2
2
3
4
2
12

In Exercises 85–100, use the test-point method to solve each
polynomial inequality.
85. x 2 + 4 x − 12 ≤ 0
86. x 2 − 8 x + 7 > 0

In Exercises 51–58, solve each compound or inequality.
51. 2 x + 5 < 1 or 2 + x > 4

97. x 2 ≥ 1

52. 3 x − 2 > 7 or
2x − 3
4 − 3x
53.
≤ 2 or
≥ 2
4
2
5 − 3x
1
x −1
54.
≥
or
≤1
3
6
3
2x + 1
x
x
55.
≥ x + 1 or − 1 >
2
3
3
x+2
x
x −1
x+1
56.
< + 1 or
>
2
3
3
5
x −1
x
2x + 5
x+1
57.
> − 1 or
≤
2
3
3
6
2x + 1
x
3−x
x
> −1
58.
≤ + 1 or
3
4
2
3

87. 6 x 2 + 7 x − 3 ≥ 0

88. 4 x 2 − 2 x − 2 < 0

89. ( x + 3 )( x + 1)( x − 1) ≥ 0
90. ( x + 4 )( x − 1 )( x + 2 ) ≤ 0
91. x 3 − 4 x 2 − 12 x > 0
92. x 3 + 8 x 2 + 15 x > 0
93. x 2 + 2 x < −1

94. 4 x 2 + 12 x < −9

x3 − x2

96. x 3 − 9 x 2 ≥ 0

95.
99.

x3

≥ 0

< −8

98. x 4 ≤ 16
100. x 4 > 9

2( 1 − x ) > 1

In Exercises 59–66, solve each compound and inequality.
59. 3 − 2 x ≤ 7 and 2 x − 3 ≤ 7
60. 6 − x ≤ 3 x + 10 and 7 x − 14 ≤ 3 x + 14
61. 2 ( x + 1 ) + 3 ≥ 1 and 2 ( 2 − x ) > −6
62. 3( x + 1 ) − 2 ≥ 4 and 3( 1 − x ) + 13 > 4
63. 2 ( x + 1 ) − 3 > 7 and 3( 2 x + 1 ) + 1 < 10
64. 5( x + 2 ) + 7 < 2 and 2 ( 5 − 3 x ) + 1 < 17
65. 5 + 3( x − 1 ) < 3 + 3( x + 1 ) and 3 x − 7 ≤ 8
66. 2 x − 3 > 11 and

5( 2 x + 1 ) < 3( 4 x + 1 ) − 2 ( x − 1 )

In Exercises 101–120, solve each rational inequality.
x+2
< 0
x−5
x+4
103.
< 0
x
x+1
105.
≤ 3
x+2
( x − 2 )( x + 2 )
107.
> 0
x
( x − 2 )( x + 1 )
109.
≥ 0
( x − 3 )( x + 5 )
x2 − 1
111. 2
≤ 0
x −4
x+4
113.
≥1
3x − 2
2x + 6
115. 3 ≤
2x + 1
x+2
x −1
≥
117.
x−3
x+3
101.

119.

x −1
x+2
≤
x+1
x−3

x−3
> 0
x+1
x
104.
> 0
x−2
x −1
106.
≥ 3
x−2
( x − 1 )( x + 3 )
108.
< 0
x−2
( x − 1 )( x − 3 )
110.
≥ 0
( x + 2 )( x + 4 )
x2 − 9
112. 2
≤ 0
x − 64
2x − 3
114.
≤1
x+3
x−2
116.
< −1
2x + 1
x+1
x
118.
≥
x−2
x −1
x+3
x −1
120.
≤
x+1
x−2
102.

152

Chapter 1 Equations and Inequalities

Applying the Concepts
121. Appliance markup. The markup over the dealer’s cost on
a new refrigerator ranges from 15% to 20%. If the dealer’s
cost is $1750, over what range will the selling price vary?
122. Return on investment. An investor has $5000 to invest
for a period of one year. Find the range of per annum simple
interest rates required to generate interest between $200 and
$275 inclusive.
123. Hybrid car trip. Sometime after passing a truck stop
300 miles from the start of her trip, Cora’s hybrid car ran
out of gas. Assuming that the tank could hold 12 gallons of
gasoline and the hybrid car averaged 40 miles per gallon,
find the range of gasoline (in gallons) that could have been
in the tank at the start of the trip.
124. Seikan Tunnel. The Seikan Tunnel is a 33.5 miles-long
railway tunnel in Japan that connects the main Japanese
island of Honshu to the northern island of Hokkaido. A
friend boards the bullet train at the Kikonai station at
9:48 a.m. towards Tokyo. The Kikonai station is 8.4 miles
from the entry of the tunnel, and there is no cellphone
reception in the tunnel. The average speed of the bullet
train in the tunnel is 85 miles per hour, and the average
speed outside of the tunnel is 160 miles per hour. At what
time would you be confident enough to call your friend
knowing that they passed through the tunnel and their
cellphone reception is restored.

128. Pedometer cost. A company produces a pedometer at a
cost of $3 each and sells the pedometer for $5 each. If the
company has to recover an initial expense of $4000 before
any profit is earned, how many pedometers must be sold to
earn a profit in excess of $3000?
129. Car sales. A car dealer has three times as many SUVs and
twice as many convertibles as four-door sedans. How many
four-door sedans does the dealer have if she has at least
48 cars of these three types?

130. Temperature conversion. The formula for converting
Fahrenheit temperature F to Celsius temperature C is
5
C = ( F − 32 ). What range in degrees Celsius corre9
sponds to a range of 68 ° to 86° Fahrenheit?
131. Temperature. The number N of water mites in a water sample
depends on the temperature t in degrees Fahrenheit and is given
by N = 132t − t 2 . At what temperature will the number of
mites exceed 3200?
132. Falling object. The height h of an object thrown from
the top of a ski lift 1584 feet high after t seconds is
h = −16t 2 + 32t + 1584. For what times is the height of
the object at least 1200 feet?

125. Cruise ship. A cruise ship is set to sail out from Miami,
Florida, to Nassau in The Bahamas, a distance of 178 miles.
The ship was 50 miles along its path when the captain contacted the port authorities in Nassau informing them that the
ship was on course with a steady speed of 24 miles per hour.
After what length of time should the port authorities expect
the cruise ship to arrive?
126. Average grade. Sean has taken three exams and earned
scores of 85, 72, and 77 out of a possible 100 points. He
needs an average of at least 80 to earn a B in the course.
What range of scores on the fourth (and last) 100-point test
will guarantee a B in the course?
127. Butterfat content. How much cream that is 30% butterfat
must be added to milk that is 3% butterfat to have 270 quarts
that are at least 4.5% butterfat?

133. Blackjack. A gambler playing blackjack in a casino using
four decks noticed that 20% of the cards that had been
dealt were jacks, queens, kings, or aces. After x cards
had been dealt, he knew that the likelihood that the next
card dealt would be a jack, a queen, a king, or an ace was

Section 1.6 Inequalities
64 − 0.2 x
. For what values of x is this likelihood greater
208 − x
than 50%?

134. Area of a triangle. The base of a triangle is 3 centimeters
greater than the height. Find the possible heights h so that the
area of such a triangle will be at least 5 square centimeters.

Beyond the Basics
135. Find the numbers k for which the quadratic equation
2 x 2 + kx + 2 = 0 has two real solutions.
136. Find the numbers k for which the quadratic equation
2 x 2 + kx + 2 = 0 has no real solutions.
137. Find the numbers k for which the quadratic equation
x 2 + kx + k = 0 has two real solutions.
138. Find the numbers k for which the quadratic equation
x 2 + kx + k = 0 has no real solutions.
x
1
6x
1
139. Solve:
≥ and
< .
4x − 1
2
2x + 1
4
2x − 1
x − 10
140. Solve:
> 1 and
> 2.
x−8
x−7
141. Find all values of c for which it is possible to find two numbers
whose product is 36 and whose sum is c.

GETTING READY

142. Find all values of c for which it is possible to find two numbers
whose sum is 12 and the sum of whose squares is c.
143. An import firm pays a tax of $10 on each radio it imports.
In addition to this tax, a penalty tax must be paid if more
than 1000 radios are imported. The penalty tax is computed
by multiplying 5 cents by the number of radios imported in
excess of 1000. This tax must be paid on each radio imported.
If 1006 radios are imported, the penalty tax is 6 ⋅ 5 = 30
cents and is paid on each of the 1006 radios. If the firm wants
to spend no more than a total of $640,000 on import taxes,
how many radios can it import?
144. A TV quiz program pays a contestant $100 for each correct
answer for ten questions. If all ten questions are answered
correctly, bonus questions are asked. The reward for every
correct answer is increased by $50 for each bonus question
that is correctly answered. Any incorrect answer ends the
game. If two bonus questions are answered correctly, the
contestant receives $200 for each of the 12 questions. If a
contestant won more than $3500, how many questions must
have been answered correctly?

Critical Thinking / Discussion / Writing
145. Give an example of a quadratic inequality with each of the
following solution sets.
a. ( −4, 5 )
b. [ −2, 6 ]
c. ( −∞, ∞ )
d. ∅
e. { 3 }
f. ( −∞, 2 ) ∪ ( 2, ∞ )
146. Give an example of an inequality with each of the following
solution sets.
a. ( −2, 4 ]

b. [ 3, 5 )

c. Is there a quadratic inequality whose solution set is ( 2, 5 ]?

for the Next Section

REVIEW CONCEPTS
Interval and set notations (Section P.1, pages 8-9)
Solving linear equations (Section 1.1, pages 82-84)
Solving compound inequalities (Section 1.6, pages 145–148)
REVIEW SKILLS
Determine absolute value. (Section P.1, pages 9–10)
In Exercises GR1–GR6, evaluate each expression.
GR2. 3 − 7
GR1. −3
GR3.

6−4

GR4. − 2

GR5.

0

GR6. −15.8

Distance between two points on a number line
(Section P.1, pages 10–11)
In Exercises GR7–GR10, find the distance between the given
pair of points on a number line.
GR7. −2 and 5
GR8. −8 and −15
GR9. 2.3 and 5.7

153

GR10. −5 and 0

Absolute value notation (Section P.1, pages 9–10)
In Exercises GR11–GR16, express each statement in algebraic
notation using absolute values.
GR11. The distance from x to −2 is 5.
GR12. x is either 3 or −3.
GR13. x is at most 2 units from 4.
GR14. x is either to the left of −5 or to the right of 5 on a
number line.
GR15. x is within 3 units of 5.
GR16. x is closer to 2 than to 6.

154

Chapter 1 Equations and Inequalities

1.7

Equations and Inequalities
Involving Absolute Value
Objectives

Videos for
this Section

1

Solve equations involving absolute value.

2

Solve inequalities involving absolute value.

Traveling the Suez Canal
The Suez Canal is an artificial waterway
passage connecting the Mediterranean
Sea to the Red Sea. At a length of
120 miles, it is the world’s longest canal
without locks. The Suez Canal creates a
more direct shipping route between Europe
and Asia, shortening the alternative route
around the Cape of Good Hope in South
Africa by approximately 4000 miles, or
9 days at the speed of 16 knots. Located in
Egypt, the canal handles about 10 percent
of global maritime traffic, and it is generating 2% of Egypt’s GDP.
On March 23, 2021, a 1,300-foot container ship called the Ever Given was on a voyage from
China to Europe and became stuck in the Suez Canal, effectively blocking all traffic. Shipping
analysts estimated that the stranded ship was holding up nearly $10 billion in trade every day.
By the afternoon of March 29, when the ship was re-floated, there was a backlog of around
450 ships waiting to pass through the canal.
In Example 6 we estimate the time needed to pass through the Suez Canal.

Objective 1

Equations Involving Absolute Value
Recall that geometrically, the absolute value of a real number a is the distance from the
origin on the number line to the point with coordinate a. The definition of absolute value is
a = a if a ≥ 0

22

21

Figure 1.12
the origin

0

1

2

Distance from

and

a = −a if a < 0.

A summary of the most useful properties of absolute value can be found on page 11 in
Section P.1.
Because the only two numbers on the number line that are exactly 2 units from the origin
are 2 and −2, they are the only solutions of the equation x = 2. See Figure 1.12. This
simple observation leads to the following rule for solving equations involving absolute value.
Solutions of u = a, a ≥ 0
If a ≥ 0 and u is an algebraic expression, then
u = a is equivalent to u = a or u = −a.
u = −a has no solution when a > 0.

Section 1.7 Equations and Inequalities Involving Absolute Value

155

Note that if a = 0, then u = 0 is the only solution of u = 0.
EXAMPLE 1

Solving an Equation Involving Absolute Value

Solve each equation.
a.

x + 3 = 0   b.

2x − 3 − 5 = 8

Solution
a. Let u = x + 3. Then, u = 0 has only one solution: u = 0.
x+3 = 0
u = 0
x+3 = 0

u = 0

x = −3

Solve for x.

Now we check the solution in the original equation.
Check

x+3 = 0
?

−3 + 3 = 0

Original equation
Replace x with −3.

0 = 0 ✓ Simplify.
We have verified that −3 is a solution of the original equation.
The solution set is { −3 } .
b. To use the rule for solving equations involving absolute value, we must first isolate
the absolute value expression to one side of the equation.
2x − 3 − 5 = 8
2 x − 3 = 13

Add 5 to both sides and simplify.

u = 13 is equivalent to u = 13 or u = −13. Let u = 2 x − 3; then 2 x − 3 = 13
is equivalent to
2 x − 3 = 13 or 2 x − 3 = −13.
u = 13 or u = −13
2 x = 16

2 x = −10

Add 3 to both sides of each equation.

x = 8

x = −5

Divide both sides by 2.

We leave it to you to check these solutions.
The solution set is { −5, 8 } .
Practice Problem 1. Solve each equation.
a.

x − 2 = 0    b.

6 x − 3 − 8 = 1

With a little practice, you may find that you can solve these types of equations without
actually writing u and the expression it represents. Then you can work with just the expression itself.
EXAMPLE 2

Solving an Equation of the Form u = v

Solve: x − 1 = x + 5 .
Solution
If u = v , then u is equal to v or u is equal to − v . Because v = ±v in every case,
we have u = v or u = −v . Thus,
u = v is equivalent to u = v or u = −v .
x − 1 = x + 5 is equivalent to
x −1 = x + 5
−1 = 5 ( False )

or

x − 1 = −( x + 5 ).
x = −2

u = x − 1, v = x + 5
Solve for x.

156

Chapter 1 Equations and Inequalities

The only solution of x − 1 = x + 5 is −2, so the solution set is { −2 } . We leave it to
you to check this solution.
Practice Problem 2. Solve: x + 2 = x − 3 .

Solving an Equation of the Form u = v

EXAMPLE 3

Solve: 2 x − 1 = x + 5
Solution
Letting u = 2 x − 1 and v = x + 5, the equation u = v is equivalent to
u=v
2x − 1 = x + 5
2x − 1 = x + 5
x=6

or

x=6

u = −v.
2 x − 1 = −( x + 5 )
2 x − 1 = −x − 5
3 x = −4
4
x=−
3

Distributive property
Isolate x term.
Solve for x.

Check

x=6

or

4
3
4
4
?
2 − −1 = − + 5
3
3
8
? − 4 + 15
− −1 =
3
3
11 ? 11
−
=
3
3
11 ? 11 ✓
Yes
=
3
3
x =−

( )

?

2( 6 ) − 1 = 6 + 5
?

11 = 11
?

11 = 11 ✓ Yes

{

}

4
The solution set of the given equation is − , 6 .
3
Practice Problem 3. Solve 3 x − 4 = 2 ( x − 1 ).

Objective 2

Inequalities Involving Absolute Value
The equation x = 2 has two solutions: 2 and −2. If x is any real number other than 2
or −2, then x < 2 or x > 2. Geometrically, this means that x is closer than 2 units to
the origin if x < 2 or farther than 2 units from the origin if x > 2. Any number x that
is closer than 2 units from the origin is in the interval −2 < x < 2. See Figure 1.13 (a).
Any number x that is farther than 2 units from the origin is in the interval ( −∞, −2 ) or the
interval ( 2, ∞ ), that is, either x < −2 or x > 2. See Figure 1.13 (b).

22

21
2 x

0
1
2, or ( 2, 2)
(a)

2

23

22

21
x
or x in (

0
1
2
2 or x 2,
, 2) ∪ (2, )

3

(b)

Figure 1.13

Graphs of inequalities involving absolute value

This discussion is equally valid when we use any positive real number a instead of the
number 2, and it leads to the following rules for replacing inequalities involving absolute
value with equivalent inequalities that do not involve absolute value.

Section 1.7 Equations and Inequalities Involving Absolute Value

157

Rules for Solving Absolute Value Inequalities
If a > 0 and u is an algebraic expression, then
1.
2.
3.
4.

u
u
u
u

< a
≤ a
> a
≥ a

−a < u < a, or u in ( −a, a ).
−a ≤ u ≤ a, or u in [ −a, a ].
u < −a or u > a, or u in ( −∞, −a ) ∪ ( a, ∞ ).
u ≤ −a or u ≥ a, or u in ( −∞, −a ] ∪ [ a, ∞ ).

is equivalent to
is equivalent to
is equivalent to
is equivalent to

EXAMPLE 4

Solving an Inequality Involving Absolute Value

Solve the inequality 4 x − 1 ≤ 9 and graph the solution set.
Solution Rule 2 applies here with u = 4 x − 1 and a = 9.
4 x − 1 ≤ 9 is equivalent to
−9 ≤ 4 x − 1 ≤ 9

Rule 2, −a ≤ u ≤ a

1 − 9 ≤ 4x − 1 + 1 ≤ 9 + 1
−8 ≤ 4 x ≤ 10
−

23 22 21

1

2 5 3
2

5 , or 22, 5
2
2

x

22

0

Simplify.
Divide by 4; the sense of the
inequality is unchanged.

8
4x
10
≤
≤
4
4
4

−2 ≤ x ≤

{

Add 1 to each part.

5
.
2

Simplify.

The solution set is x −2 ≤ x ≤

}

5
5
; that is, the solution set is the closed interval  −2,  .

2
2

See Figure 1.14.

Figure 1.14

Practice Problem 4. Solve 3 x + 3 ≤ 6 and graph the solution set.
Note the following techniques for solving inequalities similar to Example 4.

(

)

5
.
2
2. To solve 1 − 4 x ≤ 9, note that 1 − 4 x = 4 x − 1 ; so the solution is the same as
5
that for Example 4,  −2,  .

2

1. To solve 4 x − 1 < 9, change ≤ to < throughout to obtain the solution −2,

EXAMPLE 5

Solving an Inequality Involving Absolute Value

Solve the inequality 2 x − 8 ≥ 4 and graph the solution set.
Solution
Rule 4 applies here with u = 2 x − 8 and a = 4.
2 x − 8 ≥ 4 is equivalent to
2 x − 8 ≤ −4
2 x − 8 + 8 ≤ −4 + 8
2x ≤ 4
2x
4
≤
2
2
x ≤ 2
1

2
x
(

Figure 1.15

3

4 5 6
2 or x 6,
, 2] : [6, )

7

or

2 x − 8 ≥ 4.
2x − 8 + 8 ≥ 4 + 8
2 x ≥ 12
2x
12
≥
2
2
x ≥ 6

Rule 4, u ≤ −a or u ≥ a
Add 8 to each part.
Simplify.
Divide both sides of each part by 2.
Simplify.

The solution set is {x x ≤ 2 or x ≥ 6}; that is, the solution set is the set of all real
numbers x in either of the intervals ( −∞, 2 ] or [ 6, ∞ ). This set can also be written as
( −∞, 2 ] ∪ [ 6, ∞ ). See Figure 1.15.
Practice Problem 5. Solve 2 x + 3 ≥ 6 and graph the solution set.

158

Chapter 1 Equations and Inequalities

EXAMPLE 6

Estimate the Time Needed to Pass through the Suez Canal

The Suez Canal is 120 miles long. The ships navigating the canal normally average a speed
of 9 miles per hour but that can vary by as much as 20 percent (either slower or faster).
Find the possible time range it takes to pass through the Suez Canal.
Solution
To find the time needed to pass through the Suez Canal (in hours), we need to know
the distance that was traveled (in miles) and how fast (speed in miles per hour) the ship
was sailing.
Let x = actual speed of the ship in miles per hour. We know that the actual speed is
within 20% of the average speed of 9 miles per hour. That is
actual speed − average speed ≤ 20% of average speed
x − 9 ≤ 0.2 ⋅ 9
x − 9 ≤ 1.8.

Replace the verbal decription with an inequality.

Solve this inequality for x.
−1.8 ≤ x − 9 ≤ 1.8

Replace the inequality using Rule 2.

9 − 1.8 ≤ x ≤ 9 + 1.8
7.2 ≤ x ≤ 10.8

Add 9 to each part.
Simplify.

The actual speed of the ship is between 7.2 and 10.8 miles per hour.
Because
speed =

distance
distance
and time =
time
speed

the actual time t it takes for a ship to pass through the Suez Canal is
t =
SIDE NOTE

120
.
x

7.2 ≤ x ≤ 10.8

If both A and B in the inequality
A < B
are positive then taking their
reciprocals reverses the sense
of that inequality:
1
1
> .
A
B
Similar results apply when < is
replaced with ≤, >, or ≥.

1
1
1
≥
≥
7.2
x
10.8

Take reciprocals of all sides.
(Reverse the sense of the inequalities.)

1
1
1
≤
≤
x
10.8
7.2

Rearrange from the smallest to the largest.

120
120
120
≤
≤
x
10.8
7.2

Multiply each part by 120.

11.11 ≤

120
≤ 16.67
x

11.11 ≤ t ≤ 16.67

Simplify.
Replace t =

120
.
x

The time it takes to pass through the Suez Canal is between 11.11 and 16.67 hours.
Practice Problem 6. Repeat Example 6 for data for the Panama Canal. The length of the
Panama Canal is 51 miles, and ships travel with an average speed of 4.5 miles per hour with
a possible 10% variation (either slower or faster).

EXAMPLE 7

Solving Special Cases of Absolute Value Inequalities

Solve each inequality.
a.

3 x − 2 > −5    b.

5 x + 3 ≤ −2

Section 1.7 Equations and Inequalities Involving Absolute Value

159

Solution
a. Because the absolute value is always nonnegative, 3 x − 2 > −5 is true for all real
numbers x. The solution set is the set of all real numbers; in interval notation, we
write ( −∞, ∞ ).
b. There is no real number with absolute value ≤ −2 because the absolute value of any
number is nonnegative. The solution set for 5 x + 3 ≤ −2 is the empty set, ∅.
Practice Problem 7. Solve.
a.

5 − 9 x > −3   b.

EXAMPLE 8

7 x − 4 ≤ −1

Solving an Inequality of the Form u < v

Solve: x + 1 < 3 x − 1 .
Solution
x +1 < 3 x −1
x+1
< 3
x −1
x+1
< 3
x −1
x+1
−3 <
< 3
x −1

Original inequality
For x ≠ 1, divide both sides by x − 1 .
a
a
=
b
b
u < a implies −a < u < a.

We solve the two inequalities:
x+1
x −1
x+1
0 <
+3
x −1
( x + 1 ) + 3( x − 1 )
0 <
x −1
2( 2 x − 1)
0 <
x −1
2x − 1
0 <
x −1
2x − 1
> 0
x −1

and

−3 <

The solution set of this inequality
is S1 (Figure 1.15).
SIDE NOTE
You can use the “test point”
method to verify that the
2x − 1
solution set of
> 0 is S1
x −1
x−2
and that of
> 0 is S 2 as
x −1
shown in Figure 1.15.

(

)

(

1

Rewrite.

1 1 1 1 1
1

)

Divide by 2.

2

1 1 1 1 1

1
∪ ( 2, ∞ )
2

Simplify.

1 1 1 1 1 1
1
2

S 2 = ( −∞, 1 ) ∪ ( 2, ∞ )

Combine.

The solution set of this inequality
is S 2 (Figure 1.15).

1 1 1 1

1
S 1 = −∞, ∪ ( 1, ∞ )
2

S 1 ∩ S 2 = −∞,

x+1
< 3.
x −1
x+1
−3 < 0
x −1
( x + 1 ) − 3( x − 1 )
< 0
x −1
−2( x − 2 )
< 0
x −1
−( x − 2 )
< 0
x −1
x−2
> 0
x −1

1
2

2

2x − 1
> 0
x −1
x−2
> 0
x −1

2

Figure 1.15

From Figure 1.15, we see that both inequalities are true on S 1 ∩ S 2 . So the solution set of
1
the given inequality is −∞,
∪ ( 2, ∞ ).
2
Practice Problem 8. Solve: x − 2 < 4 x + 4 .

(

)

160

Chapter 1 Equations and Inequalities

1.7

Exercises

Videos for
select exercises

Concepts and Vocabulary
51. x + 1 < 3

52. x − 4 < 1

.

53. x + 2 ≥ −1

54. x + 2 > −7

.

55. 2 x − 3 < 4

56. 4 x − 6 ≤ 6

57. 5 − 2 x > 3

58. 3 x − 3 ≥ 15

59. 3 x + 4 ≤ 19

60. 9 − 7 x < 23

61. 2 x − 15 < 0

62. x + 5 ≤ −3

In Exercises 1–6, assume that a > 0.
1. The solution set of the equation x = a is
2. The solution set of the inequality x < a is
3. The solution set of the inequality x ≥ a is

.

4. The equation u = v is equivalent to u =
or u =
.
5. True or False. If a < b, then on the number line point a is
to the left of point b.
6. True or False. The statement “a is nonnegative” can be
expressed as an inequality by “a > 0.”
7. True or False. The solution set of 3 x − 2 < a is the same
as the solution set of 2 − 3 x < a.
8. True or False. If a > 0, the solution set of 3 x − 2 ≤ −a
is ∅.

Building Skills
In Exercises 9–36, solve each equation.
9. 3 x = 9
10. 4 x = 24
11. −2 x = 6

12. −x = 3

13. x + 3 = 2

14. x − 4 = 1

15. 6 − 2 x = 8

16. 6 − 3 x = 9

17. 6 x − 2 = 9

18. 6 x − 3 = 9

19. 2 x + 3 − 1 = 0

20. 2 x − 3 − 1 = 0

21.

1
x = 3
2

22.

3
x = 6
5

23.

1
x+2 = 3
4

24.

3
x −1 = 3
2

25. 6 1 − 2 x − 8 = 10

26. 5 1 − 4 x + 10 = 15

27. 2 3 x − 4 + 9 = 7

28. 9 2 x − 3 + 2 = −7

29. 2 x + 1 = −1

30. 3 x + 7 = −2

31. x 2 − 4 = 0

32. 9 − x 2 = 0

33. 1 − 2 x = 3

34. 4 − 3 x = 5

35.

1
2
−x =
3
3

36.

2
1
−x =
5
5

In Exercises 37–46, solve eaCh equation.
37. x + 3 = x + 5
38. x + 4 = x − 8
39. 3 x − 2 = 6 x + 7

40. 2 x − 4 = 4 x + 6

41. 2 x − 1 = x + 1

42. 3 x − 4 = 2( x − 1 )

43. 4 − 3 x = x − 1

44. 2 − 3 x = 2 x − 1

45. 3 x + 2 = 2( x − 1 )

46. 4 x + 7 = x + 1

In Exercises 47–62, solve each inequality.
47. 3 x < 12
48. 2 x ≤ 6
49. 4 x > 16

50. 3 x > 15

In Exercises 63–72, solve each inequality.
63. x − 2 < 1
x+3
x+3
64.
< 2
x −1
65. 2 x − 3 ≤ 3
x+1
2
66. x − 1 ≤ 1
3x + 2
67. x − 1 ≥ 2
x+2
x+3
68.
≥ 3
x−2
2x + 1
> 4
x −1
70. 2 x − 1 > 5
3x + 2
71. x − 1 ≤ 2 2 x − 5
69.

72. 2 x − 5 ≤ 2 x − 3

Applying the Concepts
73. Varying temperatures. The inequality T − 75 ≤ 20,
where T is in degrees Fahrenheit, describes the daily temperature
in Tampa during December. Give an interpretation for this
inequality, assuming that the high and low temperatures in
Tampa during December satisfy the equation T − 75 = 20.
74. Scale error. A butcher’s scale is accurate to within ±0.05
pound. A sirloin steak weighs 1.14 pounds on this scale. Let
x = actual weight of the steak. Write an absolute value
inequality in x whose solution is the range of possible values
for the actual weight of the steak.
75. Company budget. A company budgets $700 for office
supplies. The actual expense for budget supplies must be
within ±$50 of this figure. Let x = actual expense for the
office supplies. Write an absolute value inequality in x whose
solution is the range of possible amounts for the expense of
the office supplies.
76. National achievement scores. Suppose 68% of the
scores on a national achievement exam will be within
±90 points of a score of 480. Let x = a score among the
68% just described. Write an absolute value inequality in x
whose solution is the range of possible scores within
±90 points of 480.

Section 1.7 Equations and Inequalities Involving Absolute Value
77. Blood pressure. Suppose 60% of Americans have a systolic
blood pressure reading of 120, plus or minus 6.75. Let x = a
blood pressure reading among the 60% just described. Write
an absolute value inequality in x whose solution set is the
range of possible blood pressure readings within ±6.75 points
of 120.
78. Gas mileage. A motorcycle has approximately 4 gallons of
1
gas, with an error margin of ± of a gallon. If the motorcycle
4
gets 37 miles per gallon of gas, how many miles can the
motorcycle travel?
79. Search range. A search plane normally averages a speed of
110 miles per hour, but weather conditions can affect the average speed by as much as 15 miles per hour (either slower or
faster). If a search plane has 30 gallons of fuel and uses 10
gallons of fuel per hour, what is the possible search range
(in miles)?
80. High speed rail. The Acela is Amtrak’s flagship high speed
train operating in the Northeastern United States. The Acela
trains are the fastest in the Americas, reaching speeds of
150 miles per hour. Between Washington D.C. and New York
City (226 miles apart), the train achieves an average speed of
82 miles per hour, but that can vary as much as 5 percent
(either slower or faster). Find the possible time range it takes
to travel between these two cities.
81. Event planning. An event planner expects about 120 people
at a private party. She knows that this estimate could be off by
15 people (more or fewer). Food for the event costs $48 per
person. How much might the event planner’s food expense
be?
82. Company bonuses. Bonuses at a company are usually given
to about 60 people each year. The bonuses are $1200 each,
and the estimate of 60 recipients may be off by 7 people
(more or fewer). How much might the company spend on
bonuses this year?
83. Fishing revenue. Sarah sells the fish she catches to a local
restaurant for 60 cents a pound. She can usually estimate how
1
much her catch weighs to within ± pound. She estimates
2
that she has 32 pounds of fish. How much might she get paid
for her catch?

161

Beyond the Basics
In Exercises 85–90, solve each equation.
85. a. x 2 − 9 = x − 3
  b. x 2 − 8 = −2 x
c. x 2 − 5 x = 6             d.

x 2 + 3x − 2 = 2

86. a. x 2 − 7 = 6 x
b. x 2 − 2 x = 5 x − 10
c. 2 x 2 − 3 x + 5 = x 2 − 4 x + 7
d. x 2 + x + 3 = x 2 + 5 x + 1
87. 2 x − 3 + x − 2 = 4
[Consider three cases:
3
3
< x ≤ 2,  (iii) 2 < x < ∞.]
(i) −∞ < x ≤ ,  (ii)
2
2
88. 2 2 x − 3 − 3 x − 2 = 5
89. x 2 − 4 x − 7 = 5
90. 2 x 2 = x + 8 = 11
91. Show that if 0 < a < b and 0 < c < d , then ac < bd.
92. Show that if 0 < a < b < c and 0 < e < f < g, then
ae < bf < cg.
93. Show that if x 2 < a and a > 0, the solution set of the
inequality x 2 < a is {x − a < x < a}, or in interval
notation, ( − a , a ). [ Hint: a = ( a ) 2 ; factor x 2 − a. ]
94. Show that if x 2 > a and a > 0, then the solution set of the
inequality x 2 > a is ( −∞, − a ) ∪ ( a , ∞ ).
In Exercises 95–106, write an absolute value inequality with
variable x whose solution set is in the given interval(s).
95. ( 1, 7 )
96. [ 3, 8 ]
97. [ −2, 10 ]

98. ( −7, −1 )

99. ( −∞, 3 ) ∪ ( 11, ∞ )

100. ( −∞, −1 ) ∪ ( 5, ∞ )

101. ( −∞, −5 ] ∪ [ 10, ∞ )

102. ( −∞, −3 ] ∪ [ −1, ∞ )

103. ( a, b )

104. [ c, d ]

105. ( −∞, a ) ∪ ( b, ∞ )

106. ( −∞, c ] ∪ [ d , ∞ )

107. Varying temperatures. The weather forecast predicts
that temperatures will be between 8 ° and 70 ° Fahrenheit.
Let x = temperature in degrees Fahrenheit. Write an absolute value inequality in x whose solution is the predicted
range of temperatures.
In Exercises 108–113, solve each inequality for x.
108. x − 1 ≤ 5 and x ≥ 2
109. 1 ≤ x − 2 ≤ 3
110. x − 1 + x − 2 ≤ 4
111. x − 2 + x − 4 ≥ 8
112. x − 1 + x − 2 + x − 3 ≤ 6
x − 1 − ( x + 2)
113.
≥ 0
x+2

Critical Thinking / Discussion / Writing
84. Ticket sales. Ticket sales at an amusement park average about
460 on a Sunday. If actual Sunday sales are never more than
25 above or below the average and if each ticket costs $29.50,
how much money might the park take in on a Sunday?

114. For which values of x is ( x − 3) 2 = x − 3?
115. For which values of x is ( x 2 − 6 x + 8) 2 = x 2 − 6 x + 8?
116. Solve x − 3 2 − 7 x − 3 + 10 = 0.

[ Hint: Let u = x − 3 . ]

162

Chapter 1 Equations and Inequalities

KEY IDEAS AT A GLANCE

Equations =

Inequalities >, ≥, <, ≤

Operations producing equivalent equations:

Operations producing equivalent inequalities:

Add or Subtract expression on both sides.
Multiply or Divide by any number ≠ 0.

Goal: Move expressions so one side is 0.

Add or Subtract expression on both sides.
Multiply or Divide by any number > 0.
The sense of inequality Unchanged
>, ≥, <, ≤ → >, ≥, <, ≤
Multiply or Divide by any number < 0.
The sense of inequality Reversed
>, ≥, <, ≤, → <, ≤, >, ≥
Goal: Move expressions so one side is 0.

Linear: ax + b = 0
Method: Isolate variable on one side.

Linear: ax + b > 0 or ax + b < 0
Method: Solve the related equality and use test points:

x = −

Let p be the solution to ax + b = 0.

b
a

(2`, p)
test

# of Solutions: 1

(p, `)
test

p

1. Select convenient test points to determine the sign in
each interval.
2. Choose the intervals that are the solution set of the given
inequality.

p 5 2b
a

≥: Solve > and add solutions to =.
≤: Solve < and add solutions to =.
Quadratic: ax 2 + bx + c = 0
Method: Quadratic formula
x =

−b ±

b 2 − 4 ac
2a

# of Solutions: 2 when b 2 − 4 ac > 0
p

# of Solutions: 1

q

when b 2 − 4 ac

= 0

p5q

# of Solutions: 0 when b 2 − 4 ac < 0

Quadratic: ax 2 + bx + c > 0 or ax 2 + bx + c < 0
Method: Solve the related equality and use test points:
Let p, q be two solutions to ax 2 + bx + c = 0.
(2`, p)
test

( p, q)
p

test

(q, `)
test

q

Let p be the only solution to ax 2 + bx + c = 0.
(2`, p)
test

( p, `)
p

test

If there are no solutions to ax 2 + bx + c = 0.
(2`, `)
test

1. Select convenient test points to determine the sign in
each interval.
2. Choose the intervals that are the solution set of the given
inequality.

≥: Solve > and add solutions to =.
≤: Solve < and add solutions to =.

Review and Tests

163

Chapter 1 Questions for Key Ideas At a Glance
In Exercises K1–K6, solve each equation and then solve
the corresponding inequality.
K1. 2 − 5 x = 7 + 4 x and 2 − 5 x > 7 + 4 x
K2. 7 x − 1 = 2 + 3 x and 7 x − 1 ≤ 2 + 3 x

K3. 3 x 2 + 4 x = x 2 + 6 and 3 x 2 + 4 x < x 2 + 6
K4. 4 x 2 + 4 x = 2 x + 2 and 4 x 2 + 4 x ≥ 2 x + 2
K5. 3 x 2 + 2 = x 2 − 4 x and 3 x 2 + 2 > x 2 − 4 x
K6. 4 x 2 − 6 x = x 2 − 5 and 4 x 2 − 6 x ≤ x 2 − 5

CHAPTER 1 REVIEW AND TESTS
Definitions, Concepts, and Formulas

Examples

1.1 Linear Equations in One Variable
i. An equation is a statement that two mathematical expressions
are equal.
ii. The solutions or roots of an equation are those values (if any)
of the variable that satisfy the equation.
iii. Equivalent equations are equations that have the same
solution set.
iv. You can generate equivalent equations using the operations
given on page 82.
v. A formula is an equation that expresses a relationship
between two or more variables.
vi. The standard form of a conditional linear equation in x is
ax + b = 0, a ≠ 0.

Solve the equation 5 x + 3 = 2( x + 1 ) + 7.
Solution
5x + 3 = 2 x + 2 + 7
5x + 3 = 2 x + 9
5x + 3 − 3 = 2 x + 9 − 3
5x = 2 x + 6
5x − 2 x = 2 x + 6 − 2 x
3x = 6
x=2

Distributive property
Simplify.
Subtract 3 from both sides.
Simplify.
Subtract 2 x from both sides.
Simplify.
Divide both sides by 3.

Each equation above is equivalent to the preceding equation, and
so to one another.

1.2 Applications of Linear Equations
Modeling and Solving an Applied Problem

Step 1

Read the problem.

A bus leaves Houston heading for New Orleans traveling
at 40 mph. Three hours later a motorcycle leaves Houston
heading for New Orleans traveling at 55 mph on the same
route as the bus. How far is the motorcycle from Houston
when it overtakes the bus?
Solution

Step 2

Assign a variable.

Use the d = rt formula and let t represent the time it takes
the motorcycle to overtake the bus. We need this time to find
the distance.

Step 3

Write an equation.

Organize the given information.
Object

Step 4

Solve the equation.

r, mph

t, hours

d = rt

Motorcycle

55

t

55t

Bus

40

t +3

40 ( t + 3 )

55t = 40 ( t + 3 )

Both traveled the same
distance over time t .

55t = 40t + 120

Distributive property

55t − 40t = 120

Subtract 40t from both
sides and simplify.

55t = 120
t = 8

Step 5
Step 6

Answer the original question.

Check the answer using the information in the
original problem.

Simplify.
Divide both sides by 15.

It takes the motorcycle 8 hours to overtake the bus. Because the
motorcycle travels at 55 mph, it travels 8 ⋅ 55 = 440 miles and
overtakes the bus 440 miles from Houston.
The bus travels t + 3 = 8 + 3 = 11 hours at 40 mph, so it
travels 11 ⋅ 40 = 440 miles also.

164

Chapter 1 Equations and Inequalities

Definitions, Concepts, and Formulas

Examples

1.3 Quadratic Equations
i. The equation ax 2 + bx + c = 0, a ≠ 0, is the standard
form of the quadratic equation in x .

ii. Solve by using the zero-product property:
x 2 + 8 x + 15 = 0.

ii. Zero-product property: Let A and B be two algebraic
expressions. Then AB = 0 if and only if A = 0 or B = 0.

Solution

iii. Square root method: If u 2 = d, then u = ± d.
iv. Method for completing the square:
2

( 12 b ) to x + bx to get the perfect square
( x + 12 b ) . See page 106.
Add

2

2

x 2 + 8 x + 15 = 0
( x + 5) ⋅ ( x + 3) = 0

x+5 = 0

or x + 3 = 0

x = −5 or

x = −3

Factor x 2 + 8 x + 15.
Set each factor equal to 0.
Solve each equation.

The solution set is { −5, −3 }.
iv. Solve x 2 + 10 x − 2 = 0 by completing the square.
Solution

v. Quadratic formula: x =

−b ±

x 2 + 10 x = 2

Add 2 to both sides;
simplify.

x 2 + 10 x + 5 2 = 2 + 5 2

1
Add  ( 10 )  = 5 2 to
2

both sides.
Factor the left side;
simplify.

b 2 − 4 ac
2a

( x + 5 ) 2 = 27

x + 5 = ± 27 = ±3 3
x+5=3 3

or x + 5 = −3 3

x = −5 + 3 3 or

2

Take the square root of
both sides. 27 = 9 ⋅ 3.
Rewrite.
x + 5 = ±3 3

x = −5 −3 3

Subtract 5 from
each equation.

The solution set is { −5 + 3 3, −5 − 3 3 }.

1.4	Complex Numbers: Quadratic Equations
with Complex Solutions
i. Complex numbers are of the form a + bi, where a and b are
real numbers and i = −1; i 2 = −1.

The complex number −2 + 13i, has real part −2 and imaginary
part 13.

ii. The number a − bi is called the complex conjugate of
a + bi .

( 7 + 3i ) + ( 2 + i ) = ( 7 + 2 ) + ( 3 + 1 ) i = 9 + 4i

iii. Operations with complex numbers can be performed as
if they are binomials with the variable i. Set i 2 = −1 to
simplify.
Division is performed by first multiplying the numerator
and the denominator by the complex conjugate of the
denominator.
iv.

The quantity b 2 − 4 ac in the quadratic formula is called the
discriminant ( = D ).

v. If D > 0, the quadratic equation has two distinct real
solutions.
If D = 0, there is one real solution.
If D < 0, there are two nonreal complex solutions, and they
are conjugates.

The complex conjugate of −2 + 13i is −2 − 13i.
( 4 − 5i ) − ( 2 + 3i ) = ( 4 − 2 ) + ( − 5 − 3 ) i = 2 − 8i
( 2 + 3i )( 4 + 5i ) = 8 + 10i + 12i = 15i 2

=

8 + 10i + 12i + 15( −1 ) = −7 + 22
( 2 + 3i )( 4 + i )
2 + 3i
=
( 4 − i )( 4 + i )
4−i

8 + 2i + 12i + 3i 2
8 + 2i + 12i − 3
=
16 + 4i − 4i − i 2
16 + 4i − 4i + 1
5
14
5 + 14i
=
=
+ i
17
17 17
=

For 4 x 2 + 4 x − 7 = 0, we have a = 4, b = 4, and c = −7 .
Then D = b 2 − 4 ac = 4 2 − 4 ⋅ 4 ( −7 ) = 128 > 0, so
4 x 2 + 4 x − 7 = 0 has two distinct real solutions.

Review and Tests

Definitions, Concepts, and Formulas

165

Examples

1.5 Solving Other Types of Equations
Some equations can be recognized as quadratic in form by
replacing a recurrent expression by a variable, solving the
resulting quadratic equation, replacing the variable by the
recurrent expression, and solving the equations that result.
Many types of equations can be solved by factoring. However,
it is possible to introduce extraneous solutions when solving
rational equations, equations involving radicals, or equations
involving rational exponents. Remember to check the solutions.
Extraneous solutions may be introduced when you do the following:
a. Multiply both sides by an LCD that contains a variable.
b. Raise both sides to an even power.

Solve x 4 − 10 x 2 + 9 = 0.
Solution
We rewrite x 4 − 10 x 2 + 9 = 0 as ( x 2 ) 2 − 10 x 2 + 9 = 0 and
then replace x 2 by u to get u 2 − 10u + 9 = 0.
( u − 9 )( u − 1 ) = 0

Factor u 2 − 10u + 9 = 0.

u − 9 = 0 or u − 1 = 0

Set each factor equal to 0.

u = 9 or

u = 1

Solve each equation.

= 9
x = ±3

x2

= 1
x = ±1

Replace u by x 2 .
Extract square roots.

x2

or
or

The solutions set is { −3, −1, 1, 3 }.

1.6 Inequalities
i. An inequality is a statement that one algebraic expression
is less than or is less than or equal to another algebraic
expression.

ii. The real numbers that result in a true statement when those
numbers are substituted for the variable in the inequality are
called solutions of the inequality.

Solve 4( x + 1 ) ≥ 3 x + 7.
Solution
4 x + 4 ≥ 3x + 7

Distributive property

4 x ≥ 3x + 3

Subtract 4 from each side and simplify.

x ≥ 3

Subtract 3 x from each side and simplify.

The solution set is [ 3, ∞ ).
Solve x 2 + x − 12 > 0.
Solution
( x + 4 )( x − 3 ) > 0

x+4 = 0

or x − 3 = 0

x = −4 or

x = 0

Factor.
Set each factor equal to 0.
Solve each equation.

iii. A linear inequality is an inequality that can be written in
the form ax + b < 0. The symbol < can be replaced with
≤, >, or ≥.

The points −4 and 3 determine the intervals ( −∞, −4 ), ( −4, 3 ),
and ( 3, ∞ ).

iv. Test points can be used to solve polynomial or rational
inequalities. See page 148.

Choose a test point in each interval; we choose −5, 0, and 4.
Test: −5 in ( x + 4 )( x − 3 ) to get ( −5 + 4 )( −5 − 3 ) = 8 > 0.
Test: 0 in ( x + 4 )( x − 3 ) to get ( 0 + 4 )( 0 − 3 ) = −12 < 0.
Test: 4 in ( x + 4 )( x − 3 ) to get ( 4 + 4 )( 4 − 3 ) = 8 > 0.
So x 2 + x − 12 > 0 in the intervals containing −5 and 4. The
solution set is ( −∞, −4 ) ∪ ( 3, ∞ ).

1.7	Equations and Inequalities Involving
Absolute Value
i. Definition: a = a if a ≥ 0 and a = −a if a < 0.

a. Solve 3 x − 2 = 7.
Solution
3 x − 2 = 7 if and only if 3 x − 2 = −7 or 3 x − 2 = 7.

ii. Let u be a variable or an algebraic expression and let a > 0.

3 x = −5 or 3 x = 9

Then
a. u = a if and only if u = −a or u = a.
b. u < a if and only if −a < u < a.
c. u > a

if and only if u < −a or u > a.

The properties in (a) and (b) are valid if < and > are replaced
with ≤ and ≥, respectively.

x = −

5
or
3

Add 2 to each equation
and simplify.

x = 3

{

Divide each equation by 3 and
simplify.

}

5
The solution set is − , 3 .
3

166

Chapter 1 Equations and Inequalities

Definitions, Concepts, and Formulas

Examples
b. Solve 2 x + 3 < 15 .
Solution
2 x + 3 < 15 if and only if −15 < 2 x + 3 < 15.
−18 < 2 x < 12
Subtract 3 from each part and simplify.
−9 < x < 6

Divide each part by 2 and simplify.

The solution set is ( −9, 6 ).
c. Solve 5 x − 7 > 8 .
Solution
5 x − 7 > 8 if and only if 5 x − 7 < −8 or 5 x − 7 > 8.
5 x < −1 or 5 x > 15
Add 7 to each part and simplify.
1
x < − or x > 3
Divide each part by 5 and simplify.
5
1
The solution set is −∞, − ∪ ( 3, ∞ ).
5

(

)

REVIEW EXERCISES
Building Skills
In Exercises 1–18, solve each equation.

31. 3 x ( x + 1 ) = 2 x + 2

32. x 2 − x = 3( 5 − x )

1. 5 x − 4 = 11

33. x 2 − 3 x − 1 = 0

34. x 2 + 6 x + 2 = 0

+ x −1 = 0

36. x 2 + 4 x + 1 = 0

2. 12 x + 7 = 31

3. 3( 2 x − 4 ) = 9 − ( x + 7 )

35. 2 x 2

4. 4 ( x + 7 ) = 40 + 2 x

37. 3 x 2 − 12 x − 24 = 0

5. 3 x + 8 = 3( x + 2 ) + 2

39. 2 x 2

−x−2 = 0

40. 3 x 2 − 5 x + 1 = 0

6. 3 x + 8 = 3( x + 1 ) + 4

41. x 2 − x + 1 = 0

42. 3 x 2 + 4 x + 3 = 0

7. x − ( 5 x − 2 ) = 7( x − 1 ) − 2

43. x 2

− 6 x + 13 = 0

44. x 2 − 8 x + 20 = 0

8. 7 + 4 ( 3 + y ) = 8( 3 y − 1 ) + 3
2
5
7
3
9.
=
10.
=
x+3
11x − 1
x+2
x−2

45. 4 x 2 − 8 x + 13 = 0

46. 3 x 2 − 4 x + 2 = 0

y+5
y −1
7y + 3
4
+
=
+
2
3
8
3
y−3
y−4
1
12.
−
= −
13. 2 x − 3 = 4 x + 5
6
5
6
11.

38. 2 x 2 + 4 x − 3 = 0

In Exercises 47–50, find the discriminant and determine the
number and type of roots.
47. 3 x 2 − 11x + 6 = 0
49. 5 x 2

+ 2x + 1 = 0

48. x 2 − 14 x + 49 = 0
50. 9 x 2 = 25

In Exercises 51–70, solve each equation.

14. 5 x − 3 = x + 4

15. 2 x − 1 = 2 x + 7

51.

x 2 − 16 = 0

52.

16. x − 1 = 2 − x

17. 3 x − 2 = 2 x + 1

53.

4 − 7x =

54. t − 2 t + 1 = 0

2x

18. 1 − 2 x = x + 5

55. y − 2 y − 3 = 0

In Exercises 19–22, solve each equation for the indicated
variable.

56.

3x + 4 −

x−3 = 3

57.

x −1 =

5+

19. p = k + gt for g
2B
21. T =
for B
B −1

58.

20. RK = 4 + 3K for K
a
22. S =
for r
1−r

In Exercises 23–46, solve each equation. (Include all complex
solutions.)

1
(1 − x )2

−

x+6 = x

x

7
= −10
1− x

59. (7 x + 5) 2 + 2 ( 7 x + 5 ) − 15 = 0
60. ( x 2 − 1) 2 − 11( x 2 − 1 ) + 24 = 0
61. x 2 / 3 + 3 x 1/ 3 − 4 = 0

23. x 2 − 7 x = 0

24. x 2 − 32 x = 0

62. x −2 / 3 + x −1/ 3 − 6 = 0

25. x 2 − 3 x − 10 = 0

26. 2 x 2 − 9 x − 18 = 0

63. ( t + 5) 2 − 9( t + 5 ) + 20 = 0

28. ( x + 2) 2 = x ( 3 x + 2 )
x2
7
30.
+
= x
4
16

64. 3

2

27. ( x − 1 ) = 2 x 2 + 3 x − 5
x2
5
29.
+ x =
4
4

2

( y −6 1 ) − 7( y −6 1 ) = 0

65. 4 x 4 − 37 x 2 + 9 = 0

66.

1
1
5
+
=
x
x −1
6

Review Exercises
67.

2x + 1
x −1
=
2x − 1
x+1

68. 6 −

2
4
=
x
x −1

( ) ( )
4x − 3
70. (
) =1
x

7x 2
7x
69.
−3
= 18
x+1
x+1
2

Applying the Concepts
109. A circular lens has a circumference of 22 centimeters. Find
the radius of the lens.
110. A rectangle has a perimeter of 18 inches and a length of
5 inches. Find the width of the rectangle.

2

In Exercises 71–74, solve each equation for x in terms of the
other variables.
71. x 2 + 2 yx − 3 y 2 = 0

111. A trapezoid has an area of 32 square meters and a height of
8 meters. If one base is 5 meters, what is the length of the
other base?
112. What principal must be deposited for four years at 7%
annual simple interest to earn $354.20 in interest?

72. x 2 + ( y − 2 z ) x − 2 yz = 0

113. The volume of a box is 4212 cubic centimeters. If the box
is 27 centimeters long and 12 centimeters wide, how high
is it?

73. x 2 + ( 3 − 2 y ) x + y 2 − 3 y + 2 = 0
74. x 2 + ( 1 − 2 y ) x + y 2 − y − 2 = 0
In Exercises 75–86, solve each inequality. Write the solution
in interval notation.
75. x + 5 < 3

76. 2 x + 1 < 9

77. 3( x − 3 ) ≤ 8

78. x + 5 ≤ 19 + 3 x

79. x + 2 ≥

2
x − 2x
3

80. 2 x + 1 ≥

1
4 − 3x
>
6
3

82.

2
3 − 2x
>
5
2

83.

1
x−3
x
−2 ≤ +
6
2
3

84.

1
x+1
x
−3 ≤ +
4
2
2

85.

3 − 2x
x−5
+1>
4
3

86.

5 − 3x
2−x
−2 >
5
3

In Exercises 87–98, solve each compound inequality. Write
the solution in interval notation.
87. 3 x − 1 < 2 or 11 − 2 x < 5
88. 3 − 2 x > 5 or 15 − 3 x < 6
89. 4 x − 5 < 7 and 7 − 3 x < 1
90. 2 x − 1 < 3 and 4 − 3 x > 1
1
3x − 4
≤
≤ 4
6
3

91. −3 ≤ 2 x + 1 < 7

92.

93. −3 < 3 − 2 x ≤ 97

94. −

95. x 2 + x − 6 ≥ 0

96. x 3 − 9 x ≤ 0

( x − 1 )( x + 3 )
( x + 2 )( x + 5 )

≥ 0

98.

1
4 − 3x
1
<
≤
2
3
2

x 2 + 4x + 3
≤ 0
x 2 + 6x + 8

In Exercises 99–108, solve each inequality. Write the solution
set in interval notation.
99. 3 x + 2 ≤ 7
100. x − 4 ≥ 2
101. 4 x − 2 + 8 > 12

Box

x

5x − 6
3

81.

97.

167

102. 3 x − 1 + 4 < 10

103.

4−x
≥1
5

104.

1− x
<1
6

105.

x −1
≤ 3
x+2

106.

x+3
< 4
x−5

107.

2x − 3
≥ 2
x+2

108.

x+1
> 3
2x − 5

12
27

114. The ratio of the current assets of a business to its current
liabilities is called the current ratio of the business. Assuming
that the current ratio is 2.7 and the current assets total
$256,500, find the current liabilities of the business.
115. A cylindrical shaft has a volume of 8750 π cubic centimeters.
If the radius is 5 centimeters, how long is the shaft?
116. A car dealer deducted 15% of the selling price of a car he
had sold on consignment and gave the balance, $2210, to
the owner. What was the selling price of the car?
117. The third angle in an isosceles triangle measures 40 degrees
more than twice either base angle. Find the number of
degrees in each angle of the triangle.
118. A 600-mile trip took 12 hours. Half of the time was spent
traveling across flat terrain, and half was through hilly
terrain. Assuming that the average rate over the hilly section
was 20 miles per hour slower than the average rate over the
flat section, find the two rates and the distance traveled at
each rate.
119. A total of $30,000 is invested in two stocks. At the end of
the year, one returned 6% and the other returned 8% on the
original investment. How much was invested in each stock if
the total profit was $2160?
120. The monthly note on a car that was leased for two years was
$250 less than the monthly note on a car that was leased for
a year and a half. The total income from the two leases was
$21,300. Find the monthly note on each.
1
121. Two solutions, one containing 4 % iodine and the other
2
containing 12% iodine, are to be mixed to produce
10 liters of a 6% iodine solution. How many liters of each
are required?

168

Chapter 1 Equations and Inequalities

122. Two cars leave from the same place at the same time traveling
in opposite directions. One travels 5 kilometers per hour faster
than the other. After three hours, they are 495 kilometers apart.
How fast is each car traveling?
123. A total of 28 handshakes were exchanged at the end of a
party. Assuming that everyone shook hands with everyone
else, how many people were at the party?

125. Lavina bought some shares of stock for $18,040. Later when
the price had gone up $18 per share, she sold all but 20 of
them for $20,000. How many shares had she bought?
126. Joann drives her car for 15 miles at a certain speed. She
then increases her speed by 10 mph and drives for another
20 miles. If the total trip takes one hour, find her original
speed.
127. One-fourth of a herd of wild horses is in a forest. Twice the
square root of the number of horses in the herd has gone to
the mountains, and the remaining 15 are on the bank of the
river. What is the total number of horses in the herd?
128. A path of uniform width surrounds a rectangular swimming
pool that is 30 ft long and 16 ft wide. Find the width of the
path, assuming that its area is 312 ft 2 .

124. Find two positive numbers that differ by 7 and whose
product is 408.

129. The Botany Club chartered a bus for $324 to go on a field
trip, the cost to be divided equally among those attending.
At the last minute, four more members decided to go, which
reduced the cost by $0.90 per person. How many members
went on the trip?

PRACTICE TEST A
1. Solve the equation 5 x − 9 = 3 x − 5.
7
x
1
2. Solve the equation
= + .
24
8
6
1
1
3. Solve the equation
−5 =
.
x−2
x+2
4. The width of a rectangle is 3 centimeters less than the length,
and the area is 54 square centimeters. Find the dimensions of
the rectangle.
5. Solve the equation x 2 + 36 = −13 x.
6. If Fran invests $8200 at 6%, per year, how much additional
money must she invest at 8% to ensure that the interest she
receives each year is 7% of the total investment?
7. A frame of uniform width borders a painting that is 25 inches
long and 11 inches high. If the area of the framed picture is
351 square inches, find the width of the border.
8. Solve −6 x − 15 = (2 x + 5) 2 .
9. Determine the constant that should be added to the binomial
2
x2 + x
3
		 so that it becomes a perfect-square trinomial. Then write and
factor the trinomial.
10. Solve 3 x 2 − 5 x − 1 = 0.
11. A box with a square base and no top is made from a square
piece of cardboard by cutting 2-inch squares from each
corner and folding up the sides. What length of side must
the original cardboard square have if the volume of the box
is 50 cubic inches?

12. Solve x 2 + 12 x + 33 = 0.
13. Solve the polynomial equation
3 x 4 − 75 x 2 = 0
by factoring and then using the zero-product property.
14. Solve the equation
3x − 2 − 5 x = 0
by making an appropriate substitution.
15. Solve the absolute value equation
2
1
x+5 = x+7 .
3
3
In Problems 16 and 17, solve the inequality. Express the
solution set in interval notation.
x
4x
16. − 5 ≥
2
9
17. −4 < 2 x − 3 < 4
18. Solve the inequality
2
1
x −1 − 2 >
3
3
		 by first rewriting it as an equivalent inequality without
absolute value bars. Express the solution set in interval
notation.
2
13
19. Solve the linear inequality y − 13 ≤ − 7 +
y .
5
5
20. Solve the inequality 0 ≤ 5 x − 2 ≤ 8.

(

)

2 Graphs and Functions
TOPICS
2.1 The Coordinate Plane
2.2 Graphs of Equations
2.3 Lines
2.4 Functions
2.5 Properties of
Functions
2.6 A Library
of Functions
2.7 Transformations
of Functions
2.8 Combining
Functions;
Composite
Functions
2.9 Inverse Functions

Hurricanes are tracked with the use of coordinate grids, and
data from fields as diverse as medicine and sports are related
and analyzed by means of functions. The material in this
chapter introduces you to the versatile concepts that are the
everyday tools of all dynamic industries.

169

170

Chapter 2 Graphs and Functions

GETTING READY

for the Next Section

REVIEW CONCEPTS

GR5.

( 5 − 2 )2 + ( 3 − 7 )2

GR6.

( −8 + 3 ) 2 + ( −5 − 7 ) 2

GR7.

( 2 − 5 )2 + ( 8 − 6 )2

Interval notation (Section P.1, page 9)

GR8.

( 3−

REVIEW SKILLS
Evaluating algebraic expressions (Section P.1, page 15;
Section P.6, page 64)

Completing squares (Section 1.3, page 106)

The number line (Section P.1, page 6)
Equivalent equations (Section 1.1, page 82)
Completing squares (Section 1.3, page 106)

In Exercises GR1– GR8, simplify each expression.
2+5
−3 + 7
−3 − 7
GR2.
GR3.
GR1.
2
2
2
(3 − 2 ) − (3 + 2 )
GR4. 	
2

2.1

2

12 ) + ( 2 +

2

In Exercises GR9–GR14, add the appropriate term to each
binomial so that it becomes a perfect square trinomial.
Write and factor the trinomial.
GR9. x 2 + 4 x
GR10. x 2 − 6 x
GR11. x 2 − 5 x
GR13. x 2 +

3
x
2

The Coordinate Plane
Objectives

Videos for
this Section

8)

1

Plot points in the Cartesian coordinate plane.

2

Find the distance between two points.

3

Find the midpoint of a line segment.

A Fly on the Ceiling
One day the French mathematician René
Descartes noticed a fly buzzing around on
a ceiling made of square tiles. He watched
the fly and wondered how he could mathematically describe its location. Finally, he
realized that he could describe the fly’s
position by its distance from the walls of the
room. Descartes had just discovered the
coordinate plane! In fact, the coordinate
plane is sometimes called the Cartesian
plane in his honor. The discovery led to the
development of analytic geometry, the first
blending of algebra and geometry.
Although the basic idea of graphing
with coordinate axes dates all the way
back to Apollonius in the second century
b.c., Descartes, who lived in the 1600s, gets
the credit for coming up with the two-axis
system we use today. In Example 2, we will
see how the Cartesian plane helps visualize data on credit card interest rates.

GR12. x 2 + 7 x
GR14. x 2 −

4
x
5

Section 2.1 The Coordinate Plane

The Coordinate Plane

Objective 1
SIDE NOTE
Although it is common to label
the axes as x and y, other
letters are also used, especially
in applications. In a uv-plane
or an st-plane, the first letter in
the name refers to the
horizontal axis; the second, to
the vertical axis.

René Descartes
(1596–1650)
Descartes was
born at La Haye,
near Tours in
southern France. He is often
called the father of modern
science. Descartes established
a new, clear way of thinking
about philosophy and science by
accepting only those ideas that
could be proved by or deduced
from first principles. He took as
his philosophical starting point
the statement Cogito ergo
sum: “I think; therefore, I am.”
Descartes made major contributions to modern mathematics,
including the Cartesian coordinate system and the theory
of equations.

A visually powerful device for exploring relationships between numbers is the Cartesian
plane. A pair of real numbers in which the order is specified is called an ordered pair of
real numbers. The ordered pair ( a, b ) has first component a and second component b.
Two ordered pairs ( x, y ) and ( a, b ) are equal, and we write ( x, y ) = ( a, b ) if and only
if x = a and y = b.
Just as the real numbers are identified with points on a line, called the number line or
the coordinate line, the sets of ordered pairs of real numbers are identified with points on
a plane called the coordinate plane or the Cartesian plane.
We begin with two coordinate lines, one horizontal and one vertical, that intersect at
their zero points. The horizontal line (with positive numbers to the right) is usually called
the x-axis, and the vertical line (with positive numbers up) is usually called the y-axis.
Their point of intersection is called the origin. The x-axis and y-axis are called coordinate
axes, and the plane they form is sometimes called the xy-plane. The axes divide the plane
into four regions called quadrants, which are numbered as shown in Figure 2.1. The
points on the axes themselves do not belong to any of the quadrants.
The notation P ( a, b ), or P = ( a, b ), designates the point P whose first component is a
and whose second component is b. In an xy-plane, the first component, a, is called the
x-coordinate of P ( a, b ) and the second component, b, is called the y-coordinate of
P ( a, b ). The signs of the x- and y-coordinates for each quadrant are shown in Figure 2.1.
The point corresponding to the ordered pair ( a, b ) is called the graph of the ordered pair
( a, b ). However, we frequently ignore the distinction between an ordered pair and its graph.
y
y-axis

Quadrant II
(2, 1)

EXAMPLE 1

25

Quadrant I
(1, 1)
1

2

Origin

3

4 . . .

x-axis
a

x

Quadrant IV
(1, 2)

Quadrants in a plane

Graphing Points

5

A( 3, 1 ), B ( −2, 4 ), C ( −3, − 4 ), D ( 2, −3 ), and E ( −3, 0 ).

1

Solution
Figure 2.2 shows a coordinate plane along with the graph of the given points. These points
are located by moving left, right, up, or down starting from the origin ( 0, 0 ).

21
21

A
5 x

1

D
C
25

Figure 2.2

(3, 4)

Graph the following points in the xy-plane:

y

E

P(a, b)

b
.
.
.
4
3
2
1

24 23 22 21 0
21
Quadrant III 22
(2, 2)
23
24

Figure 2.1

B

171

Graphing points

A( 3, 1 )
3 units right, 1 unit up
B ( −2, 4 )
2 units left, 4 units up
C ( −3, − 4 ) 3 units left, 4 units down

D ( 2, −3 ) 2 units right, 3 units down
E ( −3, 0 ) 3 units left

Practice Problem 1. Graph the following points in the xy-plane:

(

P ( −2, 2 ), Q ( 4, 0 ), R ( 5, −3 ), S ( 0, −3 ), and T −2,

)

1
.
2

172

Chapter 2 Graphs and Functions

Pairs of related items can be displayed as ordered pairs. For example, you might write
(Jason, 12/1/1982) and (Ashlym, 4/6/1990) for the names and birthdays of two relatives.
A more practical example is given next.
EXAMPLE 2

Graphing Data on the Number of Smartphones
Sold to Users Worldwide

The data in Table 2.1 show the number of smartphones sold to users worldwide (in millions)
over the years 2012–2021.
TABLE 2.1
Year
Number Sold

2012
680.11

2013
969.72

2014
1,244.74

2015
1,423.9

2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
1,495.96 1,536.54 1,556.27 1,540.66 1,378.72 1,535.36

Source: Gartner.com

Graph the ordered pairs (year, smartphones sold), where the first coordinate represents a
year and the second coordinate represents the number of smartphones sold in that year.
Solution
We let t represent the years 2012 through 2021 and y represent the number of smartphones
sold in each year. Because the data start from the year 2012, we show a break in the t-axis.
Alternatively, we could declare a year—say, 2011—as 0. Similar comments apply to the
y-axis. The graph of the points (2012, 680.11), (2013, 969.72), (2014, 1,244.74),
(2015, 1,423.9), (2016, 1,495.96), (2017, 1,536.54), (2018, 1,556.27), (2019, 1,540.66),
(2020, 1,378.72), and (2021, 1,535.36) is shown in Figure 2.3. The figure depicts the
number of smartphones sold for every year since 2012.
y
1600

Smartphone Sales (in millions)

1500
1400
1300
1200
1100
1000
900
800
700
600
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
Year

Figure 2.3

t

Worldwide smartphones sales

Practice Problem 2. The data in Table 2.2 show the average mortgage interest rates for
a 30-year conventional loan in the United States over the years 2011–2020.
TABLE 2.2
Year
Interest Rate

2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
4.45 3.66 3.98 4.17 3.85 3.65 3.99 4.54 3.94 3.11

Source: FreddieMac.com

Graph the ordered pairs ( year, interest rate ), where the first coordinate represents a year and
the second coordinate represents the interest rate in that year.

Section 2.1 The Coordinate Plane

173

The display in Figure 2.3 is called the scatter diagram of the data. There are numerous other
ways of visualizing the data. Two such ways are shown in Figure 2.4(a) and Figure 2.4(b).
1600

1536.54 1556.27 1540.66 1535.36
1495.96
1423.9
1378.72

1500
1400
Smartphone Sales

1300

1244.74

1200
1100
969.72

1000
900
800
700

680.11

600
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
Year
(a) Bar graph
1600

1536.54

1500

1423.9

1400

1495.96

1556.27

1378.72

1300
Smartphone Sales

1540.66 1535.36

1244.74

1200
1100
1000

969.72

900
800
700
600

680.11
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
Year
(b) Line graph

Figure 2.4

10

–10

10

–10

Figure 2.5

Viewing rectangle

Objective 2

Two methods of visualizing data

Scales on a Graphing Utility
When drawing a graph, you can use different scales for the x- and y-axes. Similarly, the
scale can be set separately for each coordinate axis on a graphing utility. Once scales are
set, you get a viewing rectangle, where your graphs are displayed. For example, in Figure 2.5,
the scale for the x-axis (the distance between each tick mark) is 1, whereas the scale for the
y-axis is 2. Although newer calculators, like the TI-84 plus, have two display modes
(CLASSIC and MATHPRINT) both display graphs identically. Read more about viewing
rectangles in your graphing calculator manual.

Distance Formula
c

b

a
a2

Figure 2.6
theorem

b2

c2

Pythagorean

If a Cartesian coordinate system has the same unit of measurement, such as inches or centimeters, on both axes, we can then calculate the distance between any two points in the
coordinate plane in the given unit.
Recall that the Pythagorean Theorem states that in a right triangle with hypotenuse of
length c and the other two sides of lengths a and b,
a2 + b2 = c2 ,
Pythagorean Theorem
as shown in Figure 2.6.

174

Chapter 2 Graphs and Functions
y
|x2

x1|
Q(x2, y2)

y1|

S(x1, y2)

|y2

d(P, Q)

Suppose we want to compute the distance d ( P, Q ) between the two points P ( x 1, y 1 )
and Q ( x 2 , y 2 ). We draw a horizontal line through the point Q and a vertical line through
the point P to form the right triangle PQS, as shown in Figure 2.7.
The length of the horizontal side of the triangle is x 2 − x 1 , and the length of the vertical side is y 2 − y 1 . By the Pythagorean Theorem, we have
[ d ( P, Q ) ] 2 =

d ( P, Q ) =

P(x1, y1)

d ( P, Q ) =
x

Figure 2.7 Visualizing the
distance formula

x 2 − x1 2 + y 2 − y1 2
x 2 − x1 2 + y 2 − y1 2
2

( x 2 − x1 ) + ( y 2 − y1 )

Take the square root of both sides.
a − b 2 = ( a − b )2

2

Distance Formula in the Coordinate Plane
Let P = ( x 1, y 1 ) and Q = ( x 2 , y 2 ) be any two points in the coordinate plane. Then
the distance between P and Q, denoted d ( P, Q ), is given by the distance formula
d ( P, Q ) =

( x 2 − x 1 ) 2 + ( y 2 − y1 ) 2 .

The distance between two points in a coordinate plane is the square root of the sum of
the square of the difference between their x-coordinates and the square of the difference between their y-coordinates.
EXAMPLE 3

Finding the Distance Between Two Points

Find the distance between the points P ( −2, 5 ) and Q ( 3, − 4 ).
Solution
Let ( x 1 , y 1 ) = ( −2, 5 ) and ( x 2 , y 2 ) = ( 3, − 4 ). Then

SIDE NOTE
Remember that in general
a 2 + b 2 ≠ a + b.

RECALL
The converse of the Pythagorean Theorem states the following: If in a triangle with side
lengths a, b, and c, we have
a 2 + b 2 = c 2 then the triangle
is a right triangle.

y
5
4
3
2
1
5 4 3 2 10
1
2
3
4
C( 2, 5)
5

Figure 2.8

B(1, 4)
A(4, 3)

1 2 3 4 5 x

x 1 = −2, y 1 = 5, x 2 = 3, and y 2 = −4.
d ( P, Q ) =

( x 2 − x1 )2 + ( y 2 − y1 )2

Distance formula

=

[ 3 − ( −2 ) ]2 + ( −4 − 5 ) 2

Substitute the values for x 1 , x 2 , y 1 , y 2 .

=

5 2 + ( −9 ) 2

Simplify.

=

25 + 81 =

106 ≈ 10.3

Simplify; use a calculator.

Practice Problem 3. Find the distance between the points ( −5, 2 ) and ( −4, 1 ).
In the next example, we use the distance formula and the converse of the Pythagorean
Theorem to show that the given triangle is a right triangle.
EXAMPLE 4

Identifying a Right Triangle

Let A( 4, 3 ), B( 1, 4 ), and C ( −2, −5 ) be three points in the plane.
a. Sketch triangle ABC.
b. Find the length of each side of the triangle.
c. Show that ABC is a right triangle.
Solution
a. A sketch of the triangle formed by the three points A, B, and C is shown in Figure 2.8.
b. Using the distance formula, we have
d ( A, B ) =

( 4 − 1)2 + ( 3 − 4 )2

d ( B, C ) =

[ 1 − ( −2 ) ]

2

d ( A, C ) =

[ 4 − ( −2 ) ]2 + [ 3 − ( −5 ) ]2

=

9+1 =
2

+ [ 4 − ( −5 ) ] =
=

10,

9 + 81 =

90 = 3 10, and

36 + 64 =

100 = 10.

Section 2.1 The Coordinate Plane

175

c. We check whether the relationship a 2 + b 2 = c 2 holds in this triangle, where a, b,
and c denote the lengths of its sides. The longest side, AC, has length 10 units.
[ d ( A, B ) ] 2 + [ d ( B, C ) ] 2 = 10 + 90

Replace [ d ( A, B ) ]2 with 10
and [ d ( B, C ) ]2 with 90.

= ( 10 ) 2
= [ d ( A, C ) ]2
It follows from the converse of the Pythagorean Theorem that the triangle ABC is a
right triangle.
Practice Problem 4. Is the triangle with vertices ( 6, 2 ), ( −2, 0 ), and ( 1, 5 ) an isosceles
right triangle—that is, a right triangle with two sides of equal length?
EXAMPLE 5

Applying the Distance Formula to Baseball

The baseball diamond is in fact a square with a distance of 90 feet between each of the
consecutive bases. Use an appropriate coordinate system to calculate the distance the ball
travels when the third baseman throws it from third base to first base.
Solution
We can conveniently choose home plate as the origin and place the x-axis along the line
from home plate to first base and the y-axis along the line from home plate to third base, as
shown in Figure 2.9. The coordinates of home plate (O), first base (A), second base (C),
and third base (B) are shown in the figure.
C(90, 90)
2nd base

y

x

3rd base

B(0, 90)

1st base

Home plate

A(90, 0)

O(0, 0)

Figure 2.9

We are asked to find the distance between the points A( 90, 0 ) and B ( 0, 90 ).
d ( A, B ) =

( 90 − 0 ) 2 + ( 0 − 90 ) 2

=

( 90 ) 2 + ( − 90 ) 2

=

2( 90 ) 2

Distance formula

Simplify.

= 90 2 ≈ 127.28 feet

Simplify; use a calculator.

Practice Problem 5. Young players might play baseball in a square “diamond” with a
distance of 60 feet between consecutive bases. Repeat Example 5 for a diamond with these
dimensions.

Midpoint Formula

Objective 3
Q 5 (x2, y2)

y

Midpoint Formula

M 5 (x, y)
P 5 (x1, y1)
x

O

Figure 2.10
segment

Midpoint of a

Recall that a point M on the line segment PQ is its midpoint if d ( P, M ) = d ( M , Q ). See
Figure 2.10. We provide the midpoint formula in the xy-plane.

The coordinates of the midpoint M = ( x, y ) on the line segment joining P = ( x 1, y 1 )
and Q = ( x 2 , y 2 ) are given by
M = ( x, y ) =

( x +2 x , y +2 y ).
1

2

1

2

176

Chapter 2 Graphs and Functions

The x-coordinate of the midpoint of a line segment is the average of the x-coordinates
of the segment’s endpoints, and the y-coordinate is the average of the y-coordinates of
the segment’s endpoints.
We ask you to prove the midpoint formula in Exercise 72.
EXAMPLE 6

Finding the Midpoint of a Line Segment

Find the midpoint of the line segment joining the points P ( −3, 6 ) and Q ( 1, 4 ).
Solution
Let ( x 1, y 1 ) = ( −3, 6 ) and ( x 2 , y 2 ) = ( 1, 4 ). Then
x 1 = −3, y 1 = 6, x 2 = 1, and y 2 = 4.
Midpoint =
=

( x +2 x , y +2 y )

Midpoint formula

( −32+ 1 , 6 +2 4 )

Substitute values for x 1 , x 2 , y 1 , y 2 .

1

= ( −1, 5 )

2

1

2

Simplify.

The midpoint of the line segment joining the points P ( −3, 6 ) and Q ( 1, 4 ) is M ( −1, 5 ).
Practice Problem 6. Find the midpoint of the line segment whose endpoints are ( 5, − 2 )
and ( 6, −1 ).

2.1

Exercises

Videos for
select exercises

Concepts and Vocabulary
1. A point with a negative first coordinate and a positive second
coordinate lies in the
quadrant.
2. Any point on the x-axis has second coordinate

.

3. The distance between the points P = ( x1 , y1 ) and
Q = ( x 2 , y 2 ) is given by the formula
d ( P, Q ) =

.

4. The coordinates of the midpoint M = ( x, y ) of the line segment joining P = ( x1 , y1 ) and Q = ( x 2 , y 2 ) are given by
( x, y ) =
.
5. True or False. For any points ( x1 , y1 ) and ( x 2 , y 2 )
( x1 − x 2 ) 2 + ( y1 − y 2 ) 2 = ( x 2 − x1 ) 2 + ( y 2 − y1 ) 2 .
6. True or False. The point ( 7, − 4 ) is 4 units to the right and
2 units below the point ( 3, 2 ).
7. True or False. Every point in Quadrant II has a negative
y-coordinate.
8. True or False. Every point on the y-axis has zero as its
x-coordinate.

Building Skills
9. Plot and label each of the given points in a Cartesian coordinate
plane and state the quadrant, if any, in which each point is
located. ( 2, 2 ), ( 3, −1 ), ( −1, 0 ), ( −2, − 5 ), ( 0, 0 ), ( −7, 4 )
( 0, 3 ), ( − 4, 2 )

10. a. Write the coordinates of any five points on the x-axis.
What do these points have in common?
b. Plot the points ( −2, 1 ), ( 0, 1 ), ( 0.5, 1 ), ( 1, 1 ), and ( 2, 1 ).
Describe the set of all points of the form ( x, 1 ), where x is
a real number.
11. a. If the x-coordinate of a point is 0, where does that point
lie?
b. Plot the points ( −1, 1 ), ( −1, 1.5 ), ( −1, 2 ),( −1, 3 ), and
( −1, 4 ). Describe the set of all points of the form ( − 1, y ),
where y is a real number.
12. What figure is formed by the set of all points in a Cartesian
coordinate plane that have
a. x-coordinate equal to −3?
b. y-coordinate equal to 4?
13. Let P ( x, y ) be a point in a coordinate plane.
a. If the point P ( x, y ) lies above the x-axis, what must be
true of y ?
b. If the point P ( x, y ) lies below the x-axis, what must be
true of y ?
c. If the point P ( x, y ) lies to the left of the y-axis, what must
be true of x ?
d. If the point P ( x, y ) lies to the right of the y-axis, what
must be true of x ?

Section 2.1 The Coordinate Plane
14. Let P ( x, y ) be a point in a coordinate plane. In which
quadrant does P lie
a. if x and y are both negative?
b. if x and y are both positive?
c. if x is positive and y is negative?
d. if x is negative and y is positive?

Applying the Concepts
49. Population. The table shows the total population of the
United States in millions. (205 represents 205,000,000.) The
population is rounded to the nearest million. Plot the data in a
Cartesian coordinate system.

In Exercises 15–24, find (a) the distance between P and Q and
(b) the coordinates of the midpoint of the line segment PQ.
15. P ( 2, 1 ), Q ( 2, 5 )

Year

Total Population (millions)

1985

238

1990

250

16. P ( 3, 5 ), Q ( −2, 5 )

1995

267

17. P ( −1, − 5 ), Q ( 2, − 3 )

2000

282

18. P ( −4, 1 ), Q ( −7, − 9 )

2005

296

19. P ( −1, 1.5 ), Q ( 3, − 6.5 )

2010

308

20. P ( 0.5, 0.5 ), Q ( 1, −1 )

2015

321

21. P ( 2, 4 ), Q ( 2, 5 )

2020

333

22. P ( v − w , t ), Q ( v + w , t )
23. P ( t , k ), Q ( k , t )

177

Source: U.S. Census Bureau.

24. P ( m, n ), Q ( −n, − m )

In Exercises 25–32, determine whether the given points are
collinear. Points are collinear if they can be labeled P, Q, and
R so that d ( P , Q ) + d ( Q, R ) = d ( P , R ) .
25. ( 0, 0 ), ( 1, 2 ), ( −1, − 2 )
26. ( 3, 4 ), ( 0, 0 ), ( −3, −4 )
27. ( 4, − 2 ), ( −2, 8 ), ( 1, 3 )

28. ( 9, 6 ), ( 0, −3 ), ( 3, 1 )

29. ( −1, 4 ), ( 3, 0 ), ( 11, −8 )

30. ( − 2, 3 ), ( 3, 1 ), ( 2, −1 )

31. ( 4, − 4 ), ( 15, 1 ), ( 1, 2 )

32. ( 1, 7 ), ( −7, 8 ), ( −3, 7.5 )

33. Find the coordinates of the points that divide the line segment
joining the points P = ( −4, 0 ) and Q = ( 0, 8 ) into four
equal parts.
34. Repeat Exercise 33 with P = ( −8, 4 ) and Q = ( 16, −12 ).
In Exercises 35–42, identify the triangle PQR as an isosceles
(two sides of equal length), an equilateral (three sides of equal
length), or a scalene (three sides of different lengths) triangle.
35. P ( −5, 5 ), Q ( −1, 4 ), R ( −4, 1 )
36. P ( 3, 2 ), Q ( 6, 6 ), R ( −1, 5 )

50. Use the data from Exercise 49 and the midpoint formula for the
years 2010 and 2020 to estimate the total population for 2015.
Compare your estimate with the table value for 2015.
In Exercises 51–54, use the following vital statistics table.
Rate per 1000 Population
Year

Births

Deaths

Marriages

Divorces

1975

14.6

8.6

10.0

4.8

1980

15.9

8.8

10.6

5.2

1985

15.8

8.8

10.1

5.0

1990

16.7

8.6

9.4

4.7

1995

14.8

8.8

8.9

4.4

2000

14.4

8.7

8.5

4.2

2005

14.2

8.1

7.6

3.6

2010

13.0

8.0

6.8

3.6

2015

12.4

7.3

6.5

3.1

2020

11.4

9.7

6.1

2.9

37. P ( −4, 8 ), Q ( 0, 7 ), R ( −3, 5 )

Source: U.S. Census Bureau.

38. P ( 6, 6 ), Q ( −1, −1 ), R ( −5, 3 )

The table shows the rate per 1000 population of live births,
deaths, marriages, and divorces from 1975 to 2020. Plot the data
in a Cartesian coordinate system and connect the points with line
segments.
51. Plot (year, births).
52. Plot (year, deaths).

39. P ( 0, −1 ), Q ( 9, − 9 ), R ( 5, 1 )
40. P ( −4, 4 ), Q ( 4, 5 ), R ( 0, − 2 )
41. P ( 1, −1 ), Q ( −1, 1 ), R ( − 3, − 3 )
42. P ( −0.5, −1 ), Q ( −1.5, 1 ), R

( 3 − 1, 23 )

43. Show that the points P ( 7, −12 ), Q ( −1, 3 ), R ( 14, 11 ), and
S ( 22, − 4 ) are the vertices of a square. Find the length of the
diagonals.
44. Repeat Exercise 43 for the points P ( 8, −10 ), Q ( 9, −11 ),
R ( 8, −12 ), and S ( 7, −11 ).
45. Find x such that the point ( x, 2 ) is 5 units from ( 2, −1 ).
46. Find y such that the point ( 2, y ) is 13 units from ( −10, −3 ).
47. Find the point on the x-axis that is equidistant from the points
( − 5, 2 ) and ( 2, 3 ).
48. Find the point on the y-axis that is equidistant from the points
( 7, − 4 ) and ( 8, 3 ).

53. Plot (year, marriages).

54. Plot (year, divorces).

In Exercises 55 and 56, assume that the graph through all of
the given data points is a line segment. Use the midpoint formula to find the estimate.
55. Spending on prescription drugs. Americans spent $322
billion on prescription drugs in 2016 and $359 billion in
2020. Estimate the amount Americans spent on prescription
drugs in 2018. (Source: cms.gov)
56. Internet users. In 2016 there were 3696 million users of the
Internet worldwide. By 2020 there were 5053 million such
users. Estimate the number of users of the Internet in 2018.
(Source: http://www.internetworldstats.com)

178

Chapter 2 Graphs and Functions

The following graph shows the percentage of smartphone
sales in the United States by two leading platforms. Use this
graph for Exercises 57–60. Source: https://gs.statcounter.com

Percentage of sales

70
60

54.5

50
40
30

51.4

52.9

53.9

53.4

45.4

45.1

45

46

38.1

57.2

57.4

42.4

42.4

61.5

38.3

20
10
0

iPhone

Android

Jan
Jan
Jan
Jan
Jan
Jan
Jan
Jan
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

57. Use the appropriate line graph to determine the percentage of
smartphone sales by Android in January 2014.
58. Use the appropriate line graph to determine the percentage of
smartphone sales by iPhone in January 2017.
59. For the period from January 2014 through January 2021, for
which year were the Android sales at a maximum?
60. For the period from January 2014 through January 2021, for
which year were the iPhone sales at a maximum?
61. Length of a diagonal. The application of the Pythagorean
Theorem in three dimensions involves the relationship
between the perpendicular edges of a rectangular block and
the solid diagonal of the same block.
In the figure, show that h 2 = a 2 + b 2 + c 2 .

a

64. Use coordinates to prove that the diagonals of a parallelogram bisect each other. [Hint: Choose ( 0, 0 ) ( a, 0 ), ( b, c ),
and ( a + b, c ) as the vertices of a parallelogram.]
65. Let A( 2, 3 ), B ( 5, 4 ), and C ( 3, 8 ) be three points in a coordinate plane. Find the coordinates of the point D such that the
points A, B, C, and D form a parallelogram with
a. AB as one of the diagonals.
b. AC as one of the diagonals.
c. BC as one of the diagonals.
[Hint: Use Exercise 64.]
66. Prove that if the diagonals of a quadrilateral bisect each other,
then the quadrilateral is a parallelogram. [Hint: Choose ( 0, 0 ),
( a, 0 ), ( b, c ), and ( x, y ) as the vertices of a quadrilateral and
show that x = b − a, y = c.]
67. a. Show that ( 1, 2 ), ( −2, 6 ), ( 5, 8 ), and ( 8, 4 ) are the vertices of a parallelogram. [Hint: Use Exercise 66.]
b. Find ( x, y ) assuming that ( 3, 2 ), ( 6, 3 ), ( x, y ), and ( 6, 5 )
are the vertices of a parallelogram.
68. Show that the sum of the squares of the lengths of the sides of
a parallelogram is equal to the sum of the squares of the
lengths of the diagonals. [Hint: Choose ( 0, 0 ), ( a, 0 ), ( b, c ),
and ( a + b, c ) as the vertices of the parallelogram.]
69. Prove that in a right triangle, the midpoint of the hypotenuse
is the same distance from each of the vertices. [Hint: Let the
vertices be ( 0, 0 ), ( a, 0 ), and ( 0, b ).]
70. Isosceles triangle. An isosceles triangle ABC has right
angle at C and hypotenuse of length c. Find the length of
each leg of the triangle.
71. Equilateral triangles. Two equilateral triangles ABC and
ABD have a common side AB of length 2a. The side AB lies on
the x-axis with B = ( a, 0 ) and midpoint at the origin O. (See
the figure.) Find the coordinates of the vertices A, C , and D.

c

h

Beyond the Basics

y

b

C

62. Distance. A pilot is flying from Dullsville to Middale to
Pleasantville. With reference to an origin, Dullsville is
located at ( 2, 4 ), Middale at ( 8, 12 ), and Pleasantville at
( 20, 3 ), all numbers being in 100-mile units.
a. Locate the positions of the three cities on a Cartesian
coordinate plane.
b. Compute the distance traveled by the pilot.
c. Compute the direct distance between Dullsville and
Pleasantville.
63. Docking distance. A rope is attached to the bow of a sailboat that is 24 feet from the dock. The rope is drawn in over
a pulley 10 feet higher than the bow at the rate of 3 feet per
second. Find the distance from the boat to the dock after t
seconds.

B = (a, 0)

A
O

x

D

72. Midpoint formula. Use the notation in the accompanying
figure to prove the midpoint formula
x + x 2 y1 + y 2
M ( x, y ) = 1
,
.
2
2

(

)

y

Q(x2, y2)
uy2 2 yu
M(x, y)

10 feet

P(x1, y1)
ux 2 x1u

24 feet
O

ux2 2 xu
uy 2 y1u

T(x2, y)

S(x, y1)
x

Section 2.2 Graphs of Equations

Critical Thinking / Discussion / Writing

75. a. xy > 0

b. xy < 0

In Exercises 73–77, describe the set of points P ( x, y ) in the
xy-plane that satisfies the given condition.

76. a. x 2 + y 2 = 0

b. x 2 + y 2 ≠ 0

77. a. x ≥ 0

b. y ≥ 0

73. a. x = 0

b. y = 0

74. a. xy = 0

b. xy ≠ 0

GETTING READY

78. Describe how to determine the quadrant in which a point lies
from the signs of its coordinates.

for the Next Section

REVIEW CONCEPTS
How to plot points (Section 2.1, page 171)
Equivalent equations (Section 1.1, page 82)
REVIEW SKILLS
Evaluating algebraic expressions (Section P.1, page 15;
Section P.6, page 64)
In Exercises GR1–GR4, evaluate each expression for the given
values of x and y.
GR1. x 2 + y 2
1
1
2
2
		 a. x = , y =
		
b. x =
, y =
2
2
2
2
GR2. ( x − 1 ) 2 + ( y + 2 ) 2
		 a. x = −1, y = 1

		
b. x = 4, y = 2

2.2

y
x
+
y
x
		 a. x = 2, y = −3 			 b. x = −4, y = 3
GR3.

y
GR4. x +
x
y
		 a. x = −1, y = −2

			 b. x = 3, y = 2

Completing squares (Section 1.3, page 109)
In Exercises GR5–GR10, find the appropriate term that
should be added so that the binomial becomes a perfect
square trinomial.
GR5. x 2 − 6 x
GR6. x 2 − 8 x
GR7. y 2 + 3 y

GR8. y 2 + 5 y

GR9. x 2 − ax

GR10. x 2 + xy

Graphs of Equations
Objectives

Videos for
this Section

179

1

Sketch a graph by plotting points.

2

Find the intercepts of a graph.

3

Find the symmetries in a graph.

4

Find the equation of a circle.

Leafsmen Discover Deer
A herd of 400 deer was introduced onto a small island called
Leafs. The people both liked and
admired these beautiful creatures. However, the Leafsmen
soon discovered that deer meat
is excellent food. Also, a rumor
spread throughout Leafs that
eating deer meat prolonged
one’s life. They then began to
hunt the deer. The number of
deer, y, after t years from the initial introduction of deer into

180

Chapter 2 Graphs and Functions
Leafs is described by the equation y = −t 4 + 96t 2 + 400. When does the population of deer
become extinct in Leafs? (See Example 5.)

Graph of an Equation

Objective 1

An equation is an algebraic equality relating one or more quantities. An equation involving
two unknown quantities describes a relation between these two quantities and specifies
how one quantity changes with respect to the other quantity. The two changing (or varying)
quantities are often represented by variables. The following equations are examples of
relationships between two variables:
9
y = 2 x + 1; x 2 + y 2 = 4; y = x 2 ; x = y 2 ; F = C + 32;
5
and q = −3 p 2 + 30.
An ordered pair ( a, b ) is said to satisfy an equation with variables x and y if, when a is
substituted for x and b is substituted for y in the equation, the resulting statement is true.
For example, the ordered pair ( 2, 5 ) satisfies the equation y = 2 x + 1 because replacing
x with 2 and y with 5 yields 5 = 2( 2 ) + 1, and simplifies to 5 = 5, which is a true statement. The ordered pair ( 5, − 2 ) does not satisfy this equation because replacing x with 5
and y with −2 yields −2 = 2( 5 ) + 1, and simplifies to −2 = 11, which is false. An
ordered pair that satisfies an equation is called a solution of the equation.
In an equation involving x and y, if the value of y can be found given the value of x,
then we say that y is the dependent variable and x is the independent variable. In the
equation y = 2 x + 1, for any real number x, there is a corresponding value of y. Hence, we
have infinitely many solutions of the equation y = 2 x + 1. When these solutions are
graphed or plotted as points in the coordinate plane, they constitute the graph of the equation.
The graph of an equation is a geometric visualization of its solution set. In short, the
coordinate plane allows us to investigate algebraic equations geometrically and to read
many properties directly from their graphs.

Graph of an Equation
The graph of an equation in two variables, such as x and y, is the set of all ordered
pairs ( a, b ) in the coordinate plane that satisfy the equation.

EXAMPLE 1

TECHNOLOGY CONNECTION
Calculator graph of y = x 2 − 3
6

–4

4

–4

Sketching a Graph by Plotting Points

Sketch the graph of y = x 2 − 3.
Solution
There are infinitely many solutions of the equation y = x 2 − 3. To find a few, we choose
integer values of x between −3 and 3. Then we find the corresponding values of y as shown
in Table 2.3.
TABLE 2.3
x

−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3

y = x2 − 3

( x, y )

y =

(−3) 2 − 3 =

9−3 = 6

( − 3, 6 )

y =

(−2) 2 − 3 =

4−3 =1

( − 2, 1 )

y =

(−1) 2 − 3 = 1 − 3 = −2

( −1, − 2 )

y =

02 − 3 =

0 − 3 = −3

( 0, − 3 )

= 12 − 3 = 1 − 3 = −2

( 1, − 2 )

y

y =

22 − 3 =

4−3 =1

( 2, 1 )

y =

32 − 3 =

9−3 = 6

( 3, 6 )

Section 2.2 Graphs of Equations
y
(23, 6)

(22, 1)
24

We plot the seven solutions ( x, y ) and join them with a smooth curve, as shown in
Figure 2.11. This curve is the graph of the equation y = x 2 − 3.

y 5 x2 2 3

7

(3, 6)

21
21

Practice Problem 1. Sketch the graph of y = −x 2 + 1.
The bowl-shaped curve sketched in Figure 2.11 is called a parabola. It is easy to find
parabolas in everyday settings. For example, when you throw a ball, the path it travels is a
parabola. Also, the reflector behind a car’s headlight is parabolic in shape.
Example 1 suggests the following three steps for sketching the graph of an equation by
plotting points.

(2, 1)

1

4 x

1

(1, 22)

(21, 22)

(0, 23)

Sketching a Graph by Plotting Points

24

Figure 2.11
parabola

181

Graph of a

Step 1

Make a representative table of solutions of the equation.

Step 2

Plot the solutions as ordered pairs in the coordinate plane.

Step 3

Connect the solutions in Step 2 with a smooth curve.

Comment This point-plotting technique has obvious pitfalls. For instance, many different curves pass through the same four points. See Figure 2.12. Assume that these points are
solutions of a given equation. There is no way to guarantee that any curve we pass through
the plotted points is the actual graph of the equation. However, in general, more plotted
solutions result in a more accurate graph of the equation.

24

y

y

y

6

6

6

4

4

4

2

2

2

0

22

2

4 x

24

22

0

2

4 x

24

0

22

22

22

22

24

24

24

Figure 2.12

2

4 x

Several graphs through same four points

We now discuss some special features of the graph of an equation.

Intercepts

Objective 2

We examine the points where a graph intersects (crosses or touches) the coordinate axes.
Because all points on the x-axis have a y-coordinate of 0, any point where a graph intersects the x-axis has the form ( a, 0 ). See Figure 2.13. The number a is called an x-intercept
of the graph. Similarly, any point where a graph intersects the y-axis has the form ( 0, b ),
and the number b is called a y-intercept of the graph.

y

Finding the Intercepts of the Graph of an Equation
(0, b)
y-intercept is b.
0

(a, 0)
x-intercept is a.

Figure 2.13
graph

Intercepts of a

x

Step 1

To find the x-intercepts of the graph of an equation, set y = 0 in the
equation and solve for x.

Step 2

To find the y-intercepts of the graph of an equation, set x = 0 in the
equation and solve for y.

Note that only real number solutions in Steps 1 and 2 correspond to the intercepts.

182

Chapter 2 Graphs and Functions

EXAMPLE 2

SIDE NOTE
Do not try to calculate the
x-intercept by setting x = 0.
The term x-intercept denotes
the x-coordinate of the point
where the graph touches or
crosses the x-axis; so the
y-coordinate must be 0.

Finding Intercepts

Find the x- and y-intercepts of the graph of the equation y = x 2 − x − 2.
Solution
Step 1 Set y = 0 in the equation and solve for x.
y = x2 − x − 2

Original equation

x2 − x − 2

0 =
0 = ( x + 1 )( x − 2 )
x+1 = 0
or x − 2 = 0
x = −1 or
x = 2

y
7

Set y = 0.
Factor.
Zero-product property
Solve each equation for x.

The x-intercepts are −1 and 2.
Step 2

y = x2 2 x 2 2

25
x-intercept

1

y = x2 − x − 2

Original equation

21 0

y = 02 − 0 − 2

Set x = 0.
Solve for y.

22
24

Figure 2.14
graph

Set x = 0 in the equation and solve for y.

1

5 x
x-intercept

y-intercept

Intercepts of a

y = −2
The y-intercept is −2.

The graph of the equation y = x 2 − x − 2 is shown in Figure 2.14.
Practice Problem 2. Find the intercepts of the graph of y = 2 x 2 + 3 x − 2.

Objective 3

Symmetry
The concept of symmetry helps us sketch graphs of equations. A graph has symmetry if
one portion of the graph is a mirror image of another portion. As shown in Figure 2.15(a),
if a line  is an axis of symmetry, or line of symmetry, we can construct the mirror image
of any point P not on  by first drawing the perpendicular line segment from P to . Then
we extend this segment an equal distance on the other side to a point P′ so that the line 
perpendicularly bisects the line segment PP′. In Figure 2.15(a), we say that the point P′ is
the symmetric image of the point P about the line .
Two points M and M′ are symmetric about a point Q if Q is the midpoint of the line
segment MM ′. Figure 2.15(b) illustrates the symmetry about the origin O. Symmetry lets
us use information about part of the graph to draw the remainder of the graph.
y
y

M
P
O
O

x
M

(a)

(a) Symmetric points about a line

(b)

(b) Symmetric points about
the origin

Figure 2.15

The following three types of symmetries are frequently used.

x

Section 2.2 Graphs of Equations

183

Symmetries
1. A graph is symmetric with respect to (or about) the y-axis if for every
point ( x, y ) on the graph, the point ( −x, y ) is also on the graph. See
Figure 2.16(a).
2. A graph is symmetric with respect to (or about) the x-axis if for every
point ( x, y ) on the graph, the point ( x, − y ) is also on the graph. See
Figure 2.16(b).
3. A graph is symmetric with respect to (or about) the origin if for every
point ( x, y ) on the graph, the point ( −x, − y ) is also on the graph. See
Figure 2.16(c).

y

y

y

(x, y)

(x, y)
(x, y)

(2x, y)
O

O
x

O

x

(2x, 2y)

(b) x-axis symmetry

(a) y-axis symmetry

Figure 2.16

x
(x, 2y)

(c) Origin symmetry

Three types of symmetry

Tests for Symmetry
1. The graph of an equation is symmetric about the y-axis if replacing x with −x
results in an equivalent equation.
2. The graph of an equation is symmetric about the x-axis if replacing y with −y
results in an equivalent equation.
3. The graph of an equation is symmetric about the origin if replacing x with −x and
y with −y results in an equivalent equation.

TECHNOLOGY CONNECTION
The calculator graph of
y = 1/( x 2 + 5 ) reinforces the
result of Example 3.
0.5

EXAMPLE 3

Checking for Symmetry

Determine whether the graph of the equation y =
–5

5

1
is symmetric about the y-axis.
x2 + 5

Solution
Replace x with −x to see if ( −x, y ) also satisfies the equation.

–0.1

1
x2 + 5
1
y=
( −x ) 2 + 5
1
y= 2
x +5
y=

SIDE NOTE
Note that if only even powers of
x appear in an equation, then
the graph is symmetric with
respect to the y-axis because
for any integer n, (−x ) 2 n = x 2 n.

Original equation
Replace x with − x.
Simplify: ( −x ) 2 = x 2 .

1
is
Because replacing x with −x gives us the original equation, the graph of y = 2
x +5
symmetric with respect to the y-axis.

184

Chapter 2 Graphs and Functions

Practice Problem 3. Check whether the graph of x 2 − y 2 = 1 is symmetric about
the y-axis.

PROCEDURE IN ACTION
EXAMPLE 4

Sketching a Graph Using Symmetry

Objective

Example

Use symmetry to sketch the graph of an equation.

Use symmetry to sketch the graph of y = 4 x − x 3 .

Step 1

y-axis
1.
x -axis
Replace y with −y . Replace x with −x .

Test for all three symmetries.

About the x-axis: Replace y with − y.
About the y-axis: Replace x with −x.
About the origin: Replace x with −x
and y with − y.

Step 2 Make a table of values using any
symmetries found in Step 1.

Step 3 Plot the points from the table and
draw a smooth curve through them.

−y = 4x − x 3
y = −4 x + x 3

y = 4 ( −x ) − (−x) 3
y = −4 x + x 3

No

No

origin
Replace x with −x
and y with −y .
− y = 4 ( −x ) − (−x) 3
−y = − 4 x + x 3
y = 4x − x 3
Yes

2. Origin symmetry: If ( x, y ) is on the graph, so is ( −x, − y ). Use
only positive x-values in the table.
x

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

y = 4x − x 3

0

1.875

3

2.625

0

−5.625

3.		

y
5
3
1
0
21

3 x

1

23
25

Graph of y = 4 x − x 3 , x ≥ 0
Step 4 Extend the portion of the graph
found in Step 3, using symmetries.

4.

y
5
4
(x, y)
2
23

1

21

3

x

(2x, 2y)
24
25

Graph of y = 4 x − x 3
Practice Problem 4. Check whether the graph of x 2 = y 3 is symmetric about the
x-axis, the y-axis, and the origin.

Section 2.2 Graphs of Equations

EXAMPLE 5

185

Sketching a Graph by Using Intercepts and Symmetry

Initially, 400 deer are on Leafs island. The number y of deer on the island after t years is
described by the equation
y = −t 4 + 96t 2 + 400.
a. Sketch the graph of the equation y = −t 4 + 96t 2 + 400.
b. Adjust the graph in part a to account for only the physical aspects of the problem.
c. When do deer become extinct on Leafs?
Solution
a. (i) We find all intercepts. If we set t = 0 in the equation y = −t 4 + 96t 2 + 400,
we obtain y = 400. Thus, the y-intercept is 400.
To find the t-intercepts, we set y = 0 in the given equation.
y = −t 4 + 96t 2 + 400

Original equation

0 = −t 4 + 96t 2 + 400

Set y = 0.
Multiply both sides by −1
and interchange sides.

t 4 − 96t 2 − 400 = 0
( t 2 + 4 )( t 2 − 100 ) = 0

Factor.

( t 2 + 4 )( t + 10 )( t − 10 ) = 0

t 2 + 4 = 0 or t + 10 = 0
t = −10

Factor t 2 − 100.
or t − 10 = 0
t = 10

or

Zero-product property
Solve for t; there is no real
solution of t 2 + 4 = 0.

The t-intercepts are −10 and 10.
(ii) We check for symmetry. Note that t replaces x as the independent variable.
Symmetry about the t-axis:
Replacing y with −y gives −y = −t 4 + 96t 2 + 400. The pair ( 0, 400 ) is on the
graph of y = −t 4 + 96t 2 + 400 but not on −y = −t 4 + 96t 2 + 400. Consequently, the graph is not symmetric about the t-axis.
Symmetry about the y-axis:
Replacing t with −t in the equation y = −t 4 + 96t 2 + 400, we obtain
y = −( −t ) 4 + 96( −t ) 2 + 400 = −t 4 + 96t 2 + 400, which is the original
equation. Thus, ( −t, y ) also satisfies the equation and the graph is symmetric
about the y-axis.
Symmetry about the origin:
Replacing t with −t and y with −y in the equation y = −t 4 + 96t 2 + 400, we
obtain −y = −( −t ) 4 + 96 ( −t ) 2 + 400, or − y = −t 4 + 96t 2 + 400. As we
saw when we discussed symmetry in the t-axis, ( 0, 400 ) is a solution but ( 0, − 400 ) is
not a solution of this equation; so the graph is not symmetric with respect to the origin.
(iii) We sketch the graph by plotting points for t ≥ 0 (see Table 2.4) and then using
symmetry about the y-axis (see Figure 2.17).
y

TABLE 2.4
t

y = −t 4 + 96 t 2 + 400

0
1
5
7
9
10
11

400
495
2175
2703
1615
0
−2625

3000

( t, y )

2500

( 0, 400 )

1500

( 5, 2175 )

(9, 1615)

1000

( 7, 2703 )

500
(0, 400)

( 9, 1615 )
( 11, − 2625 )

(7, 2703)

2000

( 1, 495 )

( 10, 0 )

(5, 2175)

10 8

6

4 2 0
500

Figure 2.17

(1, 495)
2 4

6 8 10 t

186

Chapter 2 Graphs and Functions

b. The graph pertaining to the physical aspects of the problem is the red portion of the
graph in Figure 2.17.
c. The positive t-intercept, 10, gives the time in years when the deer population of Leafs
is 0; so deer are extinct after 10 years.
Practice Problem 5. Repeat Example 5, assuming that the initial deer population
is 324 and the number of deer on the island after t years is given by the equation
y = −t 4 + 77t 2 + 324.

Circles

Objective 4

Sometimes a curve that is described geometrically can also be described by an algebraic
equation. We illustrate this situation in the case of a circle.
Circle
A circle is a set of points in a Cartesian coordinate plane that are at a fixed distance
r from a specified point ( h, k ). The fixed distance r is called the radius of the circle,
and the specified point ( h, k ) is called the center of the circle.
y

Standard Form A point P ( x, y ) is on the circle if and only if its distance from the
center C ( h, k ) is r. Using the notation for the distance between the points P and C, we
have the following:
P(x, y)

d ( P, C ) = r

r
k

O

h
(x 2 h)2 1 (y 2 k)2 5 r2

Figure 2.18

( x − h)

C(h, k)

2

( x − h)
x

2

+ ( y − k )2 = r
2

+ (y − k) =

The equation ( x − h) 2 + ( y − k ) 2

=

Distance formula

r 2.

Square both sides.

r 2 is an equation of a circle with radius r and center

( h, k ). A point ( x, y ) is on the circle of radius r with center C ( h, k ) if and only if it satisfies
this equation. Figure 2.18 is the graph of a circle with center C ( h, k ) and radius r.

The Standard Form for the Equation of a Circle
The equation of a circle with center ( h, k ) and radius r is
( x − h )2 + ( y − k )2 = r 2

(1)

and is called the standard form of an equation of a circle.
EXAMPLE 6

Finding the Equation of a Circle

Find the standard form of the equation of the circle with center ( 7, −3 ) and that passes
through the point P = ( 5, − 2 ).
Solution
( x − h )2 + ( y − k )2 = r 2
( x − 7)

(2)

2

r2

Replace h with 7 and k with −3.

2

r2

−( −3 ) = 3

+ ( y − ( −3 ) ) =

( x − 7)

2

Standard form

2

+ ( y + 3) =

Because the point P = ( 5, − 2 ) lies on the circle, its coordinates satisfy equation (2). So
( 5 − 7 ) 2 + ( −2 + 3 ) 2

= r2

5 = r2

Replace x with 5 and y with − 2.
Simplify.

Replacing r 2 with 5 in equation (2) gives the required standard form
( x − 7) 2 + ( y + 3) 2 = 5.

Section 2.2 Graphs of Equations

187

Practice Problem 6. Find the standard form of the equation of the circle with center

y

( 3, − 6 ) and radius 10.

1

If an equation in two variables can be written in standard form (1), then its graph is a circle
with center ( h, k ) and radius r.

0

21

1

x

EXAMPLE 7

Specify the center and radius and graph each circle.
a. x 2 + y 2 = 1
b. ( x + 2) 2 + ( y − 3) 2 = 25

21
x2 1 y2 5 1

Figure 2.19

The unit circle

Solution
a. The equation x 2 + y 2 = 1 can be rewritten as

y

( x − 0) 2 + ( y − 0) 2 = 1 2.

7

Comparing this equation with equation ( 1 ), we conclude that the given equation is an
equation of the circle with center ( 0, 0 ) and radius 1. The graph is shown in Figure
2.19. This circle is called the unit circle.
b. Rewriting the equation ( x + 2) 2 + ( y − 3) 2 = 25 as

(22, 3)

0

26

Graphing a Circle

2

[ x − ( −2 ) ]2 + ( y − 3 ) 2

x

x + 2 = x − ( −2 )

we see that the graph of this equation is the circle with center ( −2, 3 ) and radius 5. The
graph is shown in Figure 2.20.

(x 1 2)2 1 (y 2 3)2 5 25 23

Figure 2.20 Circle with radius
5 and center at ( −2, 3 )

= 52,

Practice Problem 7. Graph the equation ( x − 2) 2 + ( y + 1) 2 = 36.

Semicircles
Letting h = 0 and k = 0 in equation (1), we have
x2 + y2 = r2

(3)

Equation (3) is the standard form for a circle with center at the origin and radius r.
We solve equation (3) for y:

SIDE NOTE
If r ≥ x ≥ 0 , then r 2 ≥ x 2,
so r 2 − x 2 ≥ 0 . If −r ≤ −x ≤ 0,
then r ≥ x ≥ 0 , and again
r 2 − x 2 ≥ 0 . So if −r ≤ x ≤ r ,
we have r 2 − x 2 ≥ 0 .

y2 = r2 − x2

Subtract x 2 from both sides.

y = ± r2 − x2

Square root property

y =

or

r2 − x2

and y = − r 2 − x 2 .

Similarly, solving equation (3) for x, we have two equations,
x =

r2 − y2

and x = − r 2 − y 2 .

The graphs of these four equations are semicircles (half circles), shown in Figure 2.21.
y

y
(0, r)

y5

(r, 0) x

(a) upper half

Figure 2.21

Semicircles

x5

r 2 2 y2

(r, 0)

x

y
(0, r)

(r, 0)
0

0

(0, r)

r2 2 x2
(2r, 0)

(2r, 0)

y

x

(2r, 0)

0

y 5 2 r 2 2 x 2 (0, 2r)

(0, 2r)

(b) lower half

(c) right half

0

x 5 2 r 2 2 y2

x

(0, 2r)

(d) left half

188

Chapter 2 Graphs and Functions

General Form If we expand the squared expressions in the standard equation of a
circle,
( x − h) 2 + ( y − k ) 2 = r 2 ,
and then simplify, we obtain an equation of the form
x 2 + y 2 + ax + by + c = 0.

(4)

Equation (4) is called the general form of the equation of a circle. An equation
Ax 2 + By 2 + Cx + Dy + E = 0 with A ≠ 0 and A = B can be converted to the general form of the equation of a circle by dividing both sides by A. See Exercise 91.
TECHNOLOGY CONNECTION

General Form of the Equation of a Circle

To graph the equation
x 2 + y 2 = 1 on a graphing
calculator, we graph the two
equations of the upper and
lower semicircles,
Y1 =

The general form of the equation of a circle is
x 2 + y 2 + ax + by + c = 0.

1 − x 2 and

Y2 = − 1 − x 2 ,
in the same window. The
calculator graph does not look
quite like a circle. We use the
ZSquare option to make the
display look like a circle.

On the other hand, if we are given an equation in general form, we can convert it to standard form by completing the squares on the x- and y-terms. This gives
( x − h) 2 + ( y − k ) 2 = d .

(5)

If d > 0, the graph of equation (5) is a circle with center ( h, k ) and radius d . If d = 0,
the graph of equation (5) is the point ( h, k ). If d < 0, there is no graph.

2

EXAMPLE 8
–3

3

Converting the General Form to Standard Form

Find the center and radius of the circle with equation
x 2 + y 2 − 6 x + 8 y + 10 = 0.

–2

Solution
Complete the squares on both the x-terms and y-terms to get standard form.
x 2 + y 2 − 6 x + 8 y + 10 = 0

RECALL
To convert x 2 + bx to a perfect

( )
( ) (

1 2
square, add b to get
2
1 2
b 2
2
x + bx +
b = x+
.
2
2
This completes the square.

)

Original equation

( x 2 − 6 x ) + ( y 2 + 8 y ) = −10

Group the x -terms
and y -terms.

( x 2 − 6 x + 9 ) + ( y 2 + 8 y + 16 ) = −10 + 9 + 16

( x − 3 )2 + ( y + 4 )2
( x − 3)

2

= 15

+ [ y − ( −4 ) ] = ( 15 )
2

Complete the squares
by adding 9 and 16 to
both sides.
Factor and simplify.

2

The last equation tells us that we have h = 3, k = −4, and r =
circle has center ( 3, − 4 ) and radius 15 ≈ 3.9.

15. Therefore, the

Practice Problem 8. Find the center and radius of the circle with equation
x 2 + y 2 + 4 x − 6 y − 12 = 0.

Section 2.2 Graphs of Equations

2.2

Exercises

189

Videos for
select exercises

Concepts and Vocabulary
1. The graph of an equation in two variables such as x and y is
the set of all ordered pairs ( a, b )
.
2. If ( −2, 4 ) is a point on a graph that is symmetric with respect
to the y-axis, then the point
is also on the
graph.

In Exercises 37–46, find
a. x- and y-intercepts.
b. symmetries (if any) about the x-axis, the y-axis, and the origin.
37.

3. If ( 0, − 5 ) is a point of a graph, then −5 is a(n)
intercept of the graph.
4. An equation in standard form of a circle with center ( 1, 0 )
and radius 2 is
.
5. True or False. The graph of the equation
3 x 2 − 2 x + y + 3 = 0 is a circle.
6. True or False. If a graph is symmetric about the x-axis, then
it must have at least one x-intercept.
7. True or False. The center of the circle with equation
( x + 3) 2 + ( y + 4) 2 = 9 is the point ( 3, 4 ).

39.

Equation

40.

p
2

p

x

Points

1 2 3 4 x

y
4
3
2
1

2p 2 p
2 21

p
2

p

x

22
23
24

( − 3, − 4 ), ( 1, 0 ), ( 4, 3 ), ( 2, 3 )

( − 35, 0 ), 1, 4

10. 2 y = 3 x + 5

( − 1, 1 ), ( 0, 2 ),

11. y =

( 3, 2 ), ( 0, 1 ), ( 8, − 3 ), ( 8, 3 )

(

1
12. y = x

( −3, 13 ), 1, 1 , 0, 0 , ( 2, 12 )

13. x 2 − y 2 = 1

( 1, 0 ), ( 0, −1 ), ( 2,

14. y 2 = x

( 1, −1 ), ( 1, 1 ), ( 0, 0 ), ( 2, −

(

) (

)

3 ), ( 2, − 3 )

21. y = x

22. y = x + 1

23. y = x + 1

24. y = − x + 1
26. y =

41.

)

2)

In Exercises 15–36, graph each equation by plotting points.
Let x = −3, − 2, − 1, 0, 1, 2, and 3 where applicable.
15. y = x + 1
16. y = x − 1
17. y = 2 x
1
18. y = x
19. y = x 2
20. y = −x 2
2

25. y =

y
4
3
2
1

y
4
3
2
1

24 23 22 21
21
22
23
24

22
23
24

In Exercises 9–14, determine whether the given points are on
the graph of the equation.

4 − x2

1 2 3 4 x

2p 2 p
2 21

Building Skills

x+1

38.

24 23 22 21
21
22
23
24

8. True or False. If ( −2, 3 ) is a point on a graph that is
symmetric with respect to the origin, then the point ( 2, − 3 ) is
also on the graph.

9. y = x − 1

y
4
3
2
1

x2 − 4

27. y =

9 − x2

28. y = − 9 − x 2

29. y =

x3

30. y = −x 3

31. y 3 = x

32. y 3 = −x

33. x = y

34. x = y

35. y = 2 − x

36. x + y = 1

y
4
3
2
1

24 23 22 21
21
22
23
24

43.

42.

1 2 3 4 x

y
4
3
2
1

24 23 22 21
21
22
23
24

24 23 22 21
21
22
23
24

44.

1 2 3 4 x

y
4
3
2
1
1 2 3 4 x

y
4
3
2
1

24 23 22 21
21
22
23
24

1 2 3 4 x

190

Chapter 2 Graphs and Functions
y
4
3
2
1

45.

46.

1 2 3 4 x

24 23 22 21
21
22
23
24

y
4
3
2
1

24 23 22 21
21
22
23
24

77. ( x + 2 ) 2 + ( y + 3 ) 2 = 11

(

78. x −

1 2 3 4 x

3 2
3
1 2
+ y+
=
2
2
4

)

(

)

In Exercises 79–88, find the standard form of the equation of a
circle that satisfies the given conditions. Graph each equation.
79. Center ( 0, 1 ); radius 2
80. Center ( 1, 0 ); radius 1
81. Center ( −1, 2 ); radius 2
82. Center ( −2, −3 ); radius 7
83. Center ( 3, − 4 ); passing through the point ( −1, 5 )
84. Center ( −1, 1 ); passing through the point ( 2, 5 )

In Exercises 47–50, complete the given graph so that it has
the indicated symmetry.

88. Diameter with endpoints ( 2, −3 ) and ( 8, 5 )

1 2 3 4 x

49. Symmetry about the origin
50. Symmetry about the x-axis and symmetry about the y-axis
In Exercises 51–64, find the x- and y-intercepts of the graph
of each equation (if any).
51. 3 x + 4 y = 12
52. 2 x + 3 y = 5
y
y
x
x
53. + = 1
54. − = 1
5
3
2
3
y−2
x+2
55. y =
56. x =
y+1
x −1
57. y = x 2 − 6 x + 8

58. x = y 2 − 5 y + 6

59. x 2 + y 2 = 4

60. ( x − 1 ) 2 + y 2 = 9

61. y =

62. y =

x2 − 1

64. y = x 2 + 1

In Exercises 65–74, test each equation for symmetry with
respect to the x-axis, the y-axis, and the origin.
65. y = x 2 + 1
66. x = y 2 + 1
67. y = x 3 + x
69. y =

5x 4

68. y = 2 x 3 − x

+ 2x 2

70. y = −3 x 6 + 2 x 4 + x 2

71. y = −3 x 5 + 2 x 3

72. y = 2 x 2 − x

73. x 2 y 2 + 2 xy

74. x 2 + y 2 = 16

=1

In Exercises 75–78, specify the center and the radius
of each circle.
75. ( x − 2 ) 2 + ( y − 3 ) 2 = 36
76. ( x + 1 ) 2 + ( y − 3 ) 2 = 16

91. 2 x 2 + 2 y 2 + 4 y = 0

92. 3 x 2 + 3 y 2 + 6 x = 0

93. x 2 + y 2 − x = 0

94. x 2 + y 2 + 1 = 0

Applying the Concepts

48. Symmetry about the y-axis

63. xy = 1

In Exercises 89–94, find
a. the center and radius of each circle.
b. the x- and y-intercepts of the graph of each circle.
89. x 2 + y 2 − 2 x − 2 y − 4 = 0
90. x 2 + y 2 − 4 x − 2 y − 15 = 0

47. Symmetry about the x-axis

9 − x2

86. Center ( 1, 2 ); touching the y-axis
87. Diameter with endpoints ( 7, 4 ) and ( −3, 6 )

y
4
3
2
1
24 23 22 21
21
22
23
24

85. Center ( 1, 2 ); touching the x-axis

In Exercises 95 and 96, a graph is described geometrically as
the path of a point P ( x, y ) on the graph. Find an equation
for the graph described.
95. Geometry. P ( x, y ) is on the graph if and only if the distance from P ( x, y ) to the x-axis is equal to its distance to
the y-axis.
96. Geometry. P ( x, y ) is the same distance from the two
points ( 1, 2 ) and ( 3, − 4 ).
97. Saving and spending. Sketch a graph (years, money) that
shows the amount of money available to you if you save
$100 each month until you have $2400 and then withdraw
$80 each month until the $2400 is gone.
98. Tracking distance during a workout. Sketch a graph
(minutes, miles) that shows the distance you have traveled
from your starting point if you jog at 6 mph for 10 minutes,
rest for 10 minutes, and then walk at 3 mph back to your
starting point.
99. Corporate profits. The equation P = −0.5t 2 − 3t + 8
describes the monthly profits (in millions of dollars) of
ABCD Corp. for the year 2022, with t = 0 representing
July 2022.
a. How much profit did the corporation make in
March 2022?
b. How much profit did the corporation make in
October 2022?
c. Sketch the graph of the equation.
d. Find the t-intercepts. What do they represent?
e. Find the P-intercept. What does it represent?

Section 2.2 Graphs of Equations
100. Female students in college. The equation
P = 18t 2 − 69t + 11,264
		 models the approximate number (in thousands) of female
college students in the United States for the academic years
2015–2020, with t = 0 representing 2015.
a. Sketch the graph of the equation.
b. Find the P-intercept. What does it represent?
(Source: https://nces.ed.gov)
101. Motion. An object is thrown up from the top
of a building that is 320 feet high. The equation
y = −16t 2 + 128t + 320 gives the object’s height (in
feet) above the ground at any time t (in seconds) after the
object is thrown.
a. What is the height of the object after 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and
6 seconds?
b. Sketch the graph of the equation
y = −16t 2 + 128t + 320.
c. What part of the graph represents the physical aspects of
the problem?
d. What are the intercepts of this graph, and what do they mean?
102. Diving for treasure. A treasure-hunting team of divers is
placed in a computer-controlled diving cage. The equation
40
2
d =
t − t 2 describes the depth d (in feet) that the
3
9
cage will descend in t minutes.
40
2
t − t 2.
a. Sketch the graph of the equation d =
3
9
b. What part of the graph represents the physical aspects of
the problem?
c. What is the total time of the entire dive?

191

104. Find the equation of a circle with radius 5 and x-intercepts
−4 and 4. [Hint: Center must be on the y-axis; there are
two such circles.]

Critical Thinking / Discussion / Writing
105. Sketch the graph of y 2 = 2 x and explain how this graph is
related to the graphs of y = 2 x and y = − 2 x .
106. Show that a graph that is symmetric with respect to the
x-axis and the y -axis must also be symmetric with respect
to the origin. Give an example to show that the converse is
not true.
107. a. 	Show that a circle with diameter having endpoints
A( 0, 1 ) and B ( 6, 8 ) intersects the x-axis at the roots of
the equation x 2 − 6 x + 8 = 0.
b. 
Show that a circle with diameter having endpoints
A( 0, 1 ) and B ( a, b ) intersects the x-axis at the roots of
the equation x 2 − ax + b = 0.
c. Use graph paper, ruler, and compass to approximate the
roots of the equation x 2 − 3 x + 1 = 0.
108. The figure shows two circles each with radius r.
a. Write the coordinates of the center of each circle.
b. Find the area of the shaded region.
y

Beyond the Basics
103. In the same coordinate system, sketch the graphs of the two
circles with equations x 2 + y 2 − 4 x + 2 y − 20 = 0 and
x 2 + y 2 − 4 x + 2 y − 31 = 0 and find the area of the
region bounded between the two circles.

GETTING READY

for the Next Section

REVIEW CONCEPTS
Solving linear equations (Section 1.1, pages 82–84)
Graphs of equations (Section 2.2, page 180)
REVIEW SKILLS
Properties of fractions (Section P.1, page 13)
In Exercises GR1–GR6, perform the indicated operations.
5−3
1−2
GR2.
GR1.
6−2
−2 − 2
GR3.

2 − ( −3 )
3 − 13

1 1
−
GR5. 2 4
3
1
− −
8
4

( )

x

GR4.

3−1
−2 − ( −6 )

3
−1
4
GR6.
1
1
−
2
6

Properties of reciprocals (Section P.1, pages 12, 13)
In Exercises GR7–GR12, write the negative reciprocal of each
number.
2
GR7. 2
GR8. −3
GR9. −
3
1
2
1
1−
−
4
2
4
GR10.
GR11.
GR12. 3
3
5
3
3
2+
− −
4
6
4

( )

Solve equations for a specified variable (Section 1.1, page 87)
In Exercises GR13–GR16, solve each equation for the
specified variable.
y
x
GR13. 2 x + 3 y = 6 for y GR14.
− = 3 for y
2
5
2
GR15. y − 2 − ( x + 1 ) = 0 for y
3
GR16. 0.1x + 0.2 y = 0 for y

192

Chapter 2 Graphs and Functions

2.3

Lines
Objectives

Videos for
this Section

1

Find the slope of a line.

2

Write the point–slope form of the equation of a line.

3

Write the slope–intercept form of the equation of a line.

4

Recognize the equations of horizontal and vertical lines.

5

Recognize the general form of the equation of a line.

6

Find equations of parallel and perpendicular lines.

7

Model data using linear regression.

A Texan’s Tall Tale
Gunslinger Wild Bill Longley’s first burial
took place on October 11, 1878, after he
was hanged before a crowd of thousands
in Giddings, Texas.
Rumors persisted that Longley’s hanging had been a hoax and that he had
somehow faked his death and escaped
execution. In 2001, Longley’s descendants
had his grave opened to determine
whether the remains matched Wild Bill’s
description: a tall white male, age 27. Both
the skeleton and some personal effects
suggested that this was indeed Wild Bill.
Modern science lent a hand, too: The DNA
of Wild Bill’s sister’s descendant Helen
Chapman was a perfect match.
Now the notorious gunman could be
buried back in the Giddings cemetery—for the second time. How did the scientists conclude from
the skeletal remains that Wild Bill was approximately 6 feet tall? (See Example 8.)

Objective1

Slope of a Line
In this section, we study various forms of first-degree equations in two variables. Because
the graphs of these equations are straight lines, they are called linear equations. Just as we
measure weight or temperature by a number, we measure the “steepness” of a line by a
number called its slope.
Consider two points P ( x 1, y 1 ) and Q ( x 2 , y 2 ) on a line, as shown in Figure 2.22. We
say that the rise is the change in y-coordinates between the points ( x 1, y 1 ) and ( x 2 , y 2 )
and that the run is the corresponding change in the x-coordinates. A positive run indicates
change to the right, as shown in Figure 2.22; a negative run indicates change to the left.
Similarly, a positive rise indicates upward change; a negative rise indicates downward
change. A zero run or rise means no change in the corresponding coordinate.

Section 2.3 Lines
y

y

y

193

y

Q(x2, y2)
Q(x1, y2)
Q(x2, y1)

P(x1, y1)

Positive Rise

P(x1, y1)

Run

Run
Run

P(x1, y1)

Run 5 0

Rise 5 0

Rise

Negative Rise

P(x1, y1)

Q(x2, y2)
O

x

x
(b)

(a)

Figure 2.22

O

O

x

x

O

(c)

(d)

Slope of a line

SIDE NOTE
The symbols ∆y (read “delta y”)
and ∆x (read delta x”) are used
to indicate a “change in y” and
a “change in x,” respectively. So
the slope is sometimes denoted
∆y
by m =
.
∆x

Slope of a Line
The slope of a nonvertical line that passes through the points P ( x 1, y 1 ) and
Q ( x 2 , y 2 ) is denoted by m and is defined by
m =

y − y1
change in y
∆y
rise
= 2
=
=
, x1 ≠ x 2 .
run
change in x
∆x
x 2 − x1

The slope of a vertical line is undefined.

change in y -coordinates
rise
=
, if the change in x, ∆x, is one unit to the
run
change in x -coordinates
right (x increases by 1 unit), then the change in y, ∆y, equals the slope of the line. The
slope of a line is therefore the change in y per unit change in x. In other words, the slope
of a line measures the rate of change of y with respect to x. Roofs, staircases, graded landscapes, and mountainous roads all have slopes. For example, if the pitch (slope) of a section of the roof is 0.4, then for every horizontal distance of 10 feet in that section, the roof
ascends 4 feet.
Because m =

10 feet 4 feet

EXAMPLE 1
y

Sketch the graph of the line that passes through P ( 1, −1 ) and Q ( 3, 3 ). Find and interpret
the slope of the line.
Q(3, 3)
Rise 5 4

O

Finding and Interpreting the Slope of a Line

Run 5 2
P(1, 21)

Figure 2.23

x

Interpreting slope

Solution
The graph of the line is sketched in Figure 2.23. The slope m of this line is given by
change in y -coordinates
rise
=
run
change in x -coordinates
( y -coordinate of Q ) − ( y -coordinate of P )
=
( x -coordinate of Q ) − ( x -coordinate of P )
( 3 ) − ( −1)
3+1
4
=
=
=
= 2.
( 3 ) − ( 1)
3−1
2

m=

Interpretation A slope of 2 means that the value of y increases two units for every one
unit increase in the value of x.
Practice Problem 1. Find and interpret the slope of the line containing the points ( −7, 5 )
and ( 6, −3 ).

194

Chapter 2 Graphs and Functions

Figure 2.24 shows several lines passing through the origin. The slope of each line is
labeled.
m is
undefined

y

m55 m52 m51
m51
2
m50

x

m 5 212

m 5 25 m 5 22

Figure 2.24

m 5 21

Slopes of lines

Main Facts about Slopes of Lines
1. Scanning graphs from left to right, lines with positive slopes rise and lines with
negative slopes fall.
2. The greater the absolute value of the slope, the steeper the line.
3. The slope of a vertical line is undefined.
4. The slope of a horizontal line is zero.
WARNING

Be careful when using the formula for finding the slope of a line joining the points ( x1 , y1 ) and

( x 2 , y 2 ). Be sure to subtract coordinates in the same order.

You can use either

m =

y 2 − y1
x 2 − x1

or

m =

y1 − y 2
,
x1 − x 2

m =

y1 − y 2
x 2 − x1

or

m =

y 2 − y1
.
x1 − x 2

but it is incorrect to use

2
Figure 2.25 shows how to construct a line with given slope, ± , with rise = ± 2 and
3
run = 3.
m52
3
2
2

3

m 5 –2
3
3
–2

3
–2

3

Figure 2.25

Objective 2

Constructing a line

Point–Slope Form
We now find the equation of a line  that passes through the point A( x 1, y 1 ) and has slope
m. Let P ( x, y ), with x ≠ x 1, be any point in the plane. Then P ( x, y ) is on the line  if and
only if the slope of the line passing through P ( x, y ) and A( x 1, y 1 ) is m. This is true if and
only if
y − y1
= m.
x − x1

Section 2.3 Lines
y

See Figure 2.26.
Multiplying both sides by x − x 1 gives y − y 1 = m ( x − x 1 ), which is also satisfied
when x = x 1 and y = y 1.

y 2 y1
m5 x2x
1
P(x, y)
A(x1, y1)
𝓵

The Point–Slope Form of the Equation of a Line
If a line has slope m and passes through the point ( x 1, y 1 ), then the point–slope form
of an equation of the line is

y 2 y1 5 m (x 2 x1)

O

x

Figure 2.26

195

y − y 1 = m( x − x 1 ) .

Point–slope form

EXAMPLE 2

Finding an Equation of a Line with Given Point and Slope

Find the point–slope form of the equation of the line passing through the point ( 1, − 2 ) with
slope m = 3. Then solve for y.
Solution
y − y1 = m ( x − x1 )

Point–slope form

y − ( −2 ) = 3( x − 1 )

Substitute x 1 = 1, y 1 = −2, and m = 3.

y + 2 = 3x − 3

Simplify.

y = 3x − 5
Slope

Solve for y.
The y-intercept is −5.

Practice Problem 2. Find the point–slope form of the equation of the line passing through
2
the point ( −2, −3 ) and with slope − . Then solve for y.
3

EXAMPLE 3

Finding an Equation of a Line Passing
Through Two Given Points

Find the point–slope form of the equation of the line  passing through the points

( −2, 1 ) and ( 3, 7 ). Then solve for y.

SIDE NOTE
You can avoid operations on
fractions
Multiply
6
y − 7 = ( x − 3)
by 5.
5
5( y − 7 ) = 6( x − 3 )
5 y − 35 = 6 x − 18
5 y = 6 x + 17
and at the end divide by 5
6
17
y = x+ .
5
5

Solution
We first find the slope m of the line .
m =

7−1
6
6
=
=
3 − ( −2 )
3+2
5

m =

y 2 − y1
x 2 − x1

6
We use m = and either of the two given points when substituting into the point–slope
5
form:
y − y 1 = m ( x − x 1 ).
With ( x 1, y 1 ) = ( −2, 1 )

With ( x 1, y 1 ) = ( 3, 7 )
6(
x − 3)
5
6
17
y = x+ .
5
5

6(
x − ( −2 ) )
5
6
17
y = x+ .
Simplify.
5
5

y −1 =

y−7 =

Simplify.
Same result

Practice Problem 3. Find the point–slope form of the equation of a line passing through
the points ( −3, − 4 ) and ( −1, 6 ). Then solve for y.

196

Chapter 2 Graphs and Functions

Slope–Intercept Form

Objective 3

One of the most convenient forms of an equation describing a straight line is called the slope–
intercept form, where we know the slope of the line and the given point is the y-intercept.
EXAMPLE 4
y

Find the point–slope form of the equation of the line with slope m and y-intercept b. Then
solve for y.

slope m
b

Solution
Because the line has y-intercept b, the line passes through the point ( 0, b ). See Figure 2.27.

(0, b)
x

O

Figure 2.27
form

Finding an Equation of a Line with a Given Slope
and y-intercept

Slope–intercept

y − y1 = m ( x − x1 )

Point–slope form

y − b = m( x − 0 )

Substitute x 1 = 0 and y 1 = b.

y − b = mx

Simplify.

y = mx + b

Solve for y.

Practice Problem 4. Find the point–slope form of the equation of the line with slope 2
and y-intercept −3. Then solve for y.
DO YOU KNOW?

Slope–Intercept Form of the Equation of a Line

No one is sure why the letter m
is used for slope. Many people
suggest that m comes from the
French monter (to climb), but
Descartes, who was French, did
not use m. Professor John
Conway of Princeton University
has suggested that m could
stand for “modulus of slope.”

The slope–intercept form of the equation of the line with slope m and y-intercept b is
y = mx + b.
The linear equation in the form y = mx + b displays the slope m (the coefficient of x)
and the y-intercept b (the constant term). The number m tells which way and how much the
line is tilted; the number b tells where the line intersects the y-axis.
EXAMPLE 5

Graph Using the Slope and y-intercept

Graph the line whose equation is y =

2
x + 2.
3

Solution
The equation

y

y =
(3, 4)

2

y 53x + 2

Run = 3
O

Figure 2.28 Locating a
second point on a line

SIDE NOTE
To graph a line with integer
3
1
where the rise = 3 and run = 1.
slope, such as 3, write 3 =

2
and y-intercept 2. To sketch the graph, find two
3
points on the line and draw a line through the two points. Use the y-intercept as one of the
2
points, and then use the slope to locate a second point. Because m = , let 2 be the rise
3
and 3 be the run. From the point ( 0, 2 ), move three units to the right (run) and two units up
(rise). This gives ( 0 + run, 2 + rise ) = ( 0 + 3, 2 + 2 ) = ( 3, 4 ) as the second point.
The line we want joins the points ( 0, 2 ) and ( 3, 4 ) and is shown in Figure 2.28.
As an alternative solution, we can locate the second point on the line by choosing
some value of x and finding the corresponding value of y directly from the given equation.
2
Choosing x = 3 will give us the corresponding value of y = ⋅ 3 + 2 = 4 . This gives
3
( 3, 4 ) as a second point. Note that some choices of x are better than others. Choosing x = 1
8
would give us the point 1, , which would not be easy to plot accurately on a Cartesian grid.
3
2
Practice Problem 5. Graph the line with slope − that contains the point ( 0, 4 ).
3
is in the slope–intercept form with slope

Rise = 2

(0, 2)

x

2
x+2
3

( )

Section 2.3 Lines

Equations of Horizontal and Vertical Lines

Objective 4

Consider the horizontal line through the point ( h, k ). The y-coordinate of every point on this
line is k. So we can write its equation as y = k. This line has slope m = 0 and y-intercept k.
Similarly, an equation of the vertical line through the point ( h, k ) is x = h. This line has
undefined slope and x-intercept h. See Figure 2.29.

y
y 5 k (h, k)

k
x5h
O

197

h

Horizontal and Vertical Lines

x

An equation of a horizontal line through ( h, k ) is y = k.
An equation of a vertical line through ( h, k ) is x = h.

Figure 2.29 Horizontal and
vertical lines

EXAMPLE 6

TECHNOLOGY CONNECTION

Discuss the graph of each equation in the xy-plane.
a. y = 2   b. x = 4

Calculator graph of y = 2
8

–10

Recognizing Horizontal and Vertical Lines

Solution
a. The equation y = 2 may be considered as an equation in two variables x and y by
writing
7

–3

0 ⋅ x + y = 2.
Any ordered pair of the form ( x, 2 ) is a solution of this equation. Some solutions
are ( −1, 2 ), ( 0, 2 ), ( 2, 2 ), and ( 7, 2 ). It follows that the graph is a line parallel to the
x-axis and two units above it, as shown in Figure 2.30. Its slope is 0.
y
8

SIDE NOTE
Sometimes it is easier to
remember that
(1) given the equation y = 2,
there is no change in y,
because y is constant. The
line has to be horizontal
( ∆y = 0 ).
(2) given the equation x = 4,
there is no change in x,
because x is constant. The
line has to be vertical
( ∆ x = 0 ).

y
4

(4, 6)
(2, 2)

1

(0, 2)

0

1

Figure 2.30

(7, 2)

2
0

8 x

Horizontal line

(4, 2)
2

8 x
(4, 0)

Figure 2.31

Vertical line

b. The equation x = 4 may be written as
x + 0 ⋅ y = 4.
TECHNOLOGY CONNECTION
You cannot graph x = 4 by
using the Y = key on your
calculator.

Objective 5

Any ordered pair of the form ( 4, y ) is a solution of this equation. Some solutions are
( 4, − 5 ), ( 4, 0 ), ( 4, 2 ), and ( 4, 6 ) . The graph is a line parallel to the y-axis and four

units to the right of it, as shown in Figure 2.31. Its slope is undefined.
Practice Problem 6. Sketch the graphs of the lines x = −3 and y = 7.

General Form of the Equation of a Line
An equation of the form
ax + by + c = 0,
where a, b, and c are constants and a and b are not both zero, is called the general form of
a linear equation. Consider two possible cases: b ≠ 0 and b = 0.

198

Chapter 2 Graphs and Functions

Suppose b ≠ 0: We can isolate y on one side and rewrite the equation in slope–intercept
form.
ax + by + c = 0

Original equation

by = −ax − c
a
c
y = − x−
b
b

Subtract ax + c from both sides.
Divide by b.

a
The result is an equation of a line in slope–intercept form with slope m = − and y-intercept
b
c
equal to − .
b
Suppose b = 0: We know that a ≠ 0, since not both a and b are zero, and we can
solve for x.
ax + 0 ⋅ y + c = 0
ax + c = 0
c
x = −
a

Replace b with 0.
Simplify.
Solve for x.

c
The graph of the equation x = − is a vertical line.
a
General Form of the Equation of a Line
The graph of every linear equation
TECHNOLOGY CONNECTION
3
Calculator graph of y =
x+3
4

ax + by + c = 0,
where a, b, and c are constants and a and b are not both zero, is a line. The equation
ax + by + c = 0 is called the general form of the equation of a line.

8

EXAMPLE 7
–10

7

Graphing a Linear Equation Using Intercepts

Find the slope, y-intercept, and x-intercept of the line with equation
3 x − 4 y + 12 = 0.

–3

Then sketch the graph.
Solution
First, solve for y to write the equation in slope–intercept form:
3 x − 4 y + 12 = 0

y
7

4 y = 3 x + 12
3
y = x + 3.
4

Original equation
Subtract 3x + 12; multiply by −1.
Divide by 4.

3
and the y-intercept is 3. To find the x-intercept,
4
3x 2 4y 1 12 5 0 set y = 0 in the original equation and obtain 3 x + 12 = 0, or x = − 4. So the x-intercept
(0, 3)
is −4.
We can sketch the graph of the equation if we can find two points on the graph. So we
1
(24,0)
use the intercepts and sketch the line joining the points ( −4, 0 ) and ( 0, 3 ). The graph is
25
21 0 1
5 x
shown in Figure 2.32.
Alternatively, we can verify that the two-intercept form of the equation of the line with
23
x-intercept a and y-intercept b is
y
x
Figure 2.32 Graphing a line
+ = 1.
a
b
using intercepts
This equation tells us that the slope m is

Section 2.3 Lines

199

We can convert the general form of a linear equation such as 3 x − 4 y + 12 = 0 to the
two-intercept form by isolating the variables from the constant part and then dividing both
sides of the equation by the constant.
3 x − 4 y + 12 = 0

Original equation

3 x − 4 y = −12
−4 y
3x
+
= 1
−12
−12
y
x
+ = 1
3
−4

Separate variables.
Divide by constant.
Simplify.

The last equation shows that the x-intercept is −4 and the y-intercept is 3.
Practice Problem 7. Sketch the graph of the equation 3 x + 4 y = 24.
Forensic scientists use various clues to determine the identity of deceased individuals.
Scientists know that certain bones serve as excellent sources of information about a person’s height. The length of the femur, the long bone that stretches from the hip (pelvis)
socket to the kneecap (patella), can be used to estimate a person’s height. Knowing the
gender of the individual increases the accuracy of this relationship between the length of
the bone and the height of the person.
EXAMPLE 8

Inferring Height from the Femur

The height H of a human male is related to the length x of his femur by the formula
H = 2.6 x + 65,
where all measurements are in centimeters. The femur of Wild Bill Longley measured
between 45 and 46 centimeters. Estimate the height of Wild Bill (in feet).
Solution
Substituting x = 45 and x = 46 into the preceding formula, we have possible heights
H 1 = ( 2.6 )( 45 ) + 65 = 182
and H 2 = ( 2.6 )( 46 ) + 65 = 184.6.

RECALL
1 foot ≈ 30.48 centimeters

Therefore, Wild Bill’s height was between 182 and 184.6 centimeters.
182
Converting to feet, we conclude that his height was between
≈ 5.97 ft and
30.48
184.6
≈ 6.06 ft. He was approximately 6 feet tall.
30.48
Practice Problem 8. Suppose the femur of a female measures between 43 and 44 centimeters. Use the formula H = 2.5 x + 54 centimeters to estimate the height of the female
in meters.

Objective 6

Parallel and Perpendicular Lines
We can use slope to decide whether two lines are parallel, perpendicular, or neither.
Parallel and Perpendicular Lines
Let  1 and  2 be two distinct lines with slopes m1 and m 2 , respectively. Then
 1 is parallel to  2 if and only if m1 = m 2 .
 1 is perpendicular to  2 if and only if m1 ⋅ m 2 = −1.
Any two vertical lines are parallel, as are any two horizontal lines. Any horizontal line
is perpendicular to any vertical line.

200

Chapter 2 Graphs and Functions

In Exercises 137 and 138, you are asked to prove these assertions. Figure 2.33 shows
examples of the slopes of a pair of parallel and a pair of perpendicular lines.
y

y
4

m2 5 3

3

m1 5 4

3

4

3

4
3

4

3

m2 5 4

3
3

m1 5 2 4

O
x

Parallel lines m1 = m 2 ￼	
Figure 2.33

O

x

Perpendicular lines m1 ⋅ m 2 = −1

PROCEDURE IN ACTION
EXAMPLE 9

Finding Equations of Parallel Lines

Objective

Example

Let  : ax + by + c = 0. Find a general form of the equation of the line  1 parallel to  through the point ( x 1, y 1 ).

Let  : 2 x − 3 y + 6 = 0. Find a general form of the equation of the line  1 parallel to  through the point ( 2, 8 ).

Step 1

1.  : 2 x − 3 y + 6 = 0
−3 y = −2 x − 6

Find the slope m of .

y =
The slope of  is m =
Step 2

2. m1 =

Write the slope of  1 .
The slope m1 of  1 is m, the same slope as .

Step 3

Write an equation of  1 .
Use point–slope form to write an equation of  1 .

3.

2
x+2
3

Divide by −3.

2
.
3

2
3

2(
x − 2)
3
2 x − 3 y + 20 = 0
1 : y − 8 =

Original equation
Subtract 2 x + 6.

 1 parallel to 
Point–slope form
Simplify.

Simplify to write the equation in the form
ax + by + c = 0.
Practice Problem 9. Find the general form of the equation of the line through ( −2, 5 )
and parallel to the line containing ( 2, 3 ) and ( 5, 7 ).

PROCEDURE IN ACTION
EXAMPLE 10

Finding Equations of Perpendicular Lines

Objective

Example

Let  : ax + by + c = 0. Find a general form of the
equation of the line  1 perpendicular to  through the point
( x1 , y1 ).

Let  : 2 x − 3 y + 6 = 0. Find a general form of the equation of the line  1 through the point ( 2, 8 ) perpendicular
to .

Section 2.3 Lines

Step 1

1.  : 2 x − 3 y + 6 = 0

Find the slope m of .

Original equation

−3 y = −2 x − 6
2
y = x+2
3
The slope of  is m =
Step 2

Write the slope of  1.

2. m1 = −

1
The slope m1 of  1 is − .
m
Step 3

Write an equation of  1
Use point–slope form to write the equation of  1

Subtract 2 x + 6.
Divide by −3.

2
.
3

3
2

 1 perpendicular to 

1 : y − 8 = −

3.

201

3(
x − 2)
2

3 x + 2 y − 22 = 0

Point–slope form
Simplify.

Simplify to write the equation in the form
ax + by + c = 0.
Practice Problem 10. Find the general form of the equation of the line through

( 3, −4 ) and perpendicular to the line 4 x + 5 y + 1 = 0.

SUMMARY OF MAIN FACTS
Form

Equation

Slope

General

ax + by + c = 0
a ≠ 0, or b ≠ 0

−

Other Information

a
if b ≠ 0
b

c
x-intercept is − , a ≠ 0 .
a

Point–slope

c
Undefined if b = 0 y-intercept is − , b ≠ 0 .
b
m
y − y1 = m( x − x1 )
Line passes through ( x 1, y 1 ).

Slope–intercept

y = mx + b

m

x-intercept is −

Two-intercept

y
x
+ =1
a
b

−

b
a

x-intercept is a; y-intercept is b.

Vertical line through ( h, k )

x = h

Undefined

When h ≠ 0, no y-intercept; x-intercept is h.
When h = 0, the graph is the y-axis.

Horizontal line through ( h, k ) y = k

0

When k ≠ 0, no x-intercept; y-intercept is k.
When k = 0, the graph is the x-axis.

b
if m ≠ 0; y-intercept is b.
m

Parallel and perpendicular lines: Two lines with slopes m1 and m 2 are
(a) parallel if m1 = m 2 and (b) perpendicular if m1 ⋅ m 2 = −1.

Objective 7

Modeling Data Using Linear Regression
Many relationships between variables can be modeled using linear equations. The success
of modeling many phenomena by linear equations can be easily explained. On a local
scale, many nonlinear equations may be reduced to linear equations by assuming that the
variables change only to a small extent. We experience this in our daily life when we perceive
the surface of Earth locally as flat. That means that any short-term data can be accurately

202

Chapter 2 Graphs and Functions

modeled by linear models. A line that best fits the given data is called a regression line. To
illustrate the method, we use Table 2.5, which gives the data for the number of monthly
active Facebook users worldwide from 2014–2020 in millions.
TABLE 2.5
Year

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

Active Facebook Users
(millions)

3385

3949

4624

5378

5938

6429

7184

y

y

7500
7000
6500
6000
5500
5000
4500
4000
3500
3000

7500
7000
6500
6000
5500
5000
4500
4000
3500
3000

Millions

Millions

The scatter diagram for the Facebook data is shown in Figure 2.34(a), and the line used to
model the data is added to the scatter diagram in Figure 2.34(b). The years 2014–2020 are
represented by the numbers 0–6, respectively.

0

Figure 2.34
SIDE NOTE
Out of all possible linear fits,
the least-squares regression
line is the one that minimizes
the sum of the squares made
from the vertical offsets.

1

2
3
4
Years since 2014
(a)

5

6

7 x

0

1

2
3
4
Years since 2014
(b)

5

6

7 x

The line is called the regression line or the least-squares line. See Figure 2.34(b). The
slope-intercept form of the equation for the line in Figure 2.34(b) is y = 631.1x + 3376.25,
where x is the number of years after 2014, and the slope and intercept values are rounded
to the nearest hundredth. The equation is found by using either a graphing calculator or
statistical formulas. Figure 2.35 shows typical error squares for a least-squares line where
the data points are the seven black dots.
EXAMPLE 11

Predictions Using Linear Regression

Use the equation y = 631.1x + 3376.25 to predict the number of monthly active Facebook users worldwide in 2025.
y
0.4

20.8 20.4

0

0.4

20.4
20.8

Figure 2.35 Least-squares
fit of the curve y = ax + b to
7 given data points

x

Solution
Because 2025 is eleven years after 2014, we set x = 11; then
y = 631.1( 11 ) + 3376.25 ≈ 10318.35.
So according to the regression prediction, 10318.35 million will be the number of
monthly active Facebook users worldwide in 2025. The quality of a prediction based on
linear regression depends on how close the relationship between the data quantities is to
being linear.
Practice Problem 11. Repeat Example 11 to predict the number of monthly active
Facebook users worldwide in 2026.
The following Technology Connection shows how a graphing calculator displays the
scatter diagram, regression line, and regression line equation.

Section 2.3 Lines

203

TECHNOLOGY CONNECTION
You can use a graphing utility to investigate the linear regression model for data points that lie
on or near a straight line. On the TI-84, the data for Example 11 are entered in five steps.

Step 1

Enter the data.
Press STAT 1 for STAT Edit. Enter the values of
the independent variable x in L1 and the
corresponding values of the dependent
variable y in L2.

Step 2

Turn on STAT Plot.
Press 2 nd Y = 1 for Plot 1. Select On; then
choose Type .
Choose X List: L1; Y list: L2; and mark: ⋅ .

2.3

Step 3

Graph the scatterplot. Press Graph .

Step 4

Find the equation of the regression line.
Press STAT and highlight CALC. Press 4 for
LinReg ( ax + b ). Press ENTER  .

Step 5

Graph the regression line with the scatterplot.
Press Y = .
Press VARS 5 for statistics. Highlight EQ and
press ENTER . (You should see the regression
equation in the Y = window.)
Press ZOOM   9 for ZoomStat. (You should see
the data graphed along with the regression line.)

Exercises

Videos for
select exercises

Concepts and Vocabulary
1. The slope of a horizontal line is
vertical line is
.

; the slope of

2. The slope of the line passing through the points P = ( x1 , y1 ) and
Q = ( x 2 , y 2 ) is given by the formula m =
.

3. Every line parallel to the line y = 3 x − 2 has slope, m, equal
to
.
4. Every line perpendicular to the line y = 3 x − 2 has slope,
m, equal to
.

204

Chapter 2 Graphs and Functions

1
5. True or False. The slope of the line y = − x + 5 is equal
4
1
to .
4
6. True or False. The y-intercept of the line y = 2 x − 3 is
equal to 3.

In Exercises 25–32, find an equation in slope–intercept form
of the line that passes through the given point and has slope
m. Also sketch the graph of the line by locating a second point
with the rise-and-run method.
25. ( 0, 5 ); m = 3
26. ( 0, 9 ); m = −2

7. True or False. The graph of the line y = 4 is a horizontal
line.

27. ( 0, 4 ); m =

8. True or False. The graph of the line x = −5 is a vertical
line.

29. ( 2, 1 ); m = −

1
2

28. ( 0, 4 ); m = −
3
2

30. ( −1, 0 ); m =

31. ( 5, − 4 ); m = 0

Building Skills

1
2

2
5

32. ( 5, − 4 ); m is undefined.

In Exercises 9–16, find the slope of the line through the given
pair of points. Without plotting any points, state whether the
line is rising, falling, horizontal, or vertical.
9. ( 1, 3 ), ( 4, 7 )

In Exercises 33–54, use the given conditions to find an
equation in slope–intercept form of each nonvertical line.
Write vertical lines in the form x = h.
33. Passing through ( 0, 1 ) and ( 1, 0 )

10. ( 0, 4 ), ( 2, 0 )

34. Passing through ( 0, 1 ) and ( 1, 3 )

11. ( 3, − 2 ), ( 6, − 2 )

35. Passing through ( −1, 3 ) and ( 3, 3 )

12. ( −3, 7 ), ( −3, − 4 )

36. Passing through ( −5, 1 ) and ( 2, 7 )

13. ( 0.5, 2 ), ( 3, −3.5 )

37. Passing through ( −2, −1 ) and ( 1, 1 )

14. ( 3, − 2 ), ( 2, −3 )

38. Passing through ( −1, −3 ) and ( 6, − 9 )
1 1
39. Passing through ,
and ( 0, 2 )
2 4

15. ( 2, 1 ), ( 1 +
16. ( 1 −

2, 5 )

3, 0 ), ( 1 +

(

3, 3 3 )

In the figure, identify the line with the given slope m.
17. m = 1
18. m = −1
19. m = 0

20. m is undefined.
y

)

40. Passing through ( 4, − 7 ) and ( 4, 3 )
41. A vertical line through ( 5, 1.7 )
42. A horizontal line through ( 1.4, 1.5 )
43. A horizontal line through ( 0, 0 )
44. A vertical line through ( 0, 0 )
45. m = 0; y-intercept = 14

O

46. m = 2; y-intercept = 5
2
47. m = − ; y-intercept = −4
3
48. m = −6; y-intercept = −3

x

49. x -intercept = −3; y-intercept = 4
50. x -intercept = −5; y-intercept = −2
51. Parallel to y = 5; passing through ( 4, 7 )
In the figure below, find the slope of each line. (The scale is
the same on both axes.)
21.  1
22.  2
23.  3

24.  4
ℓ4

y
8

ℓ3

ℓ1

52. Parallel to x = 5; passing through ( 4, 7 )
53. Perpendicular to x = −4; passing through ( −3, − 5 )
54. Perpendicular to y = −4; passing through ( −3, − 5 )
In Exercises 55–64, find the slope and intercepts from the
equation of the line. Sketch the graph of each equation.
55. y = 3 x − 2
56. y = −2 x + 3
57. x + 2 y − 4 = 0

58. x = 3 y − 9

59. 3 x − 2 y + 6 = 0

60. 2 x = −4 y + 15

61. x − 5 = 0

62. 2 y + 5 = 0

63. x = 0

64. y = 0

1
27

22 21

8 x

1
ℓ2

27

In Exercises 65–68, use the two-intercept form of the equation
of a line.
65. Find an equation of the line whose x-intercept is 4 and
y-intercept is 3.
66. Find an equation of the line whose x-intercept is −3 and
y-intercept is 2.

Section 2.3 Lines
67. Find the x- and y-intercepts of the graph of the equation
2 x + 3 y = 6.

84. 10 x + 2 y = 3 and 5 x + y = −1

68. Repeat Exercise 67 for the equation 3 x − 4 y + 12 = 0.

86. y = 3 x + 1 and 6 y + 2 x = 0

In Exercises 69–72, find the x- and y-intercepts and sketch the
graph of the equation.
69. 2 x − 3 y = 12
70. 3 x − 4 y = 12
71. −5 x + 2 y = 10

72. −4 x + 5 y = 20

73. Find an equation of the line passing through the points
( 2, 4 ) and ( 7, 9 ). Use the equation to show that the three
points ( 2, 4 ) and ( 7, 9 ), and ( −1, 1 ) are on the same line
(collinear).
74. Use the technique of Exercise 73 to check whether the points
( 7, 2 ), ( 2, − 3 ), and ( 5, 1 ) are on the same line.
75. Write the slope–intercept form of the equation of the line that
passes through the origin and is parallel to the red line shown
in the figure.

87. x = −1 and 2 x + 7 = 9
88. 2 x + 3 y = 7 and y = 2
In Exercises 89–104, find the equation of the line in slope–
intercept form satisfying the given conditions.
89. Parallel to a line with slope 3; passing through ( 2, −3 )
90. Parallel to a line with slope −2; passing through ( −1, 3 )
1
91. Perpendicular to a line with slope − ; passing through
2
( −1, 2 )
1
92. Perpendicular to a line with slope ; passing through
3
( 2, −1 )
93. Parallel to a line joining points ( 1, − 2 ) and ( −3, 2 ); passing through ( −2, − 5 )

95. Perpendicular to a line joining points ( −3, 2 ) and
( − 4, −1 ); passing through ( 1, − 2 )

6
5
4
3
2
1

96. Perpendicular to a line joining points ( 2, 1 ) and ( 4, −1 );
passing through ( −1, 2 )
1 2 3 4 5 6

x

76. Write the slope–intercept form of the equation of the line that
passes through the origin and is perpendicular to the red line
shown in the figure in Exercise 75.
77. Write the slope–intercept form of the equation of the blue line
shown in the figure that is parallel to the red line.
y

97. Parallel to y = 6 x + 5; y-intercept 4
1
98. Parallel to y = − x + 5; y-intercept 2
2
99. Perpendicular to y = 6 x + 5; y-intercept 4
1
100. Perpendicular to y = − x + 5; y-intercept −4
2
101. Parallel to x + y = 1; passing through ( 1, 1 )
102. Parallel to −2 x + 3 y = 7; passing through ( 1, 0 )
103. Perpendicular to 3 x − 9 y = 18; passing through ( −2, 4 )
104. Perpendicular to −2 x + y = 14; passing through ( 0, 2 )

6
5
4
3
2
1
22 21 O
21
22

85. x = 4 y + 8 and y = −4 x + 1

94. Parallel to a line joining points ( −2, 1 ) and ( 3, 5 ); passing
through ( 1, 2 )

y

22 21O
21
22

205

Applying the Concepts
(4, 2)
1 2 3 4 5 6

x

78. Write the slope–intercept form of the equation of the green
line shown in the figure that is perpendicular to the red line in
Exercise 77.
In Exercises 79–88, determine whether each pair of lines is
parallel, perpendicular, or neither.
79. y = 3 x − 1 and y = 3 x + 2
80. y = 2 x + 2 and y = −2 x + 2
1
81. y = 2 x − 4 and y = − x + 4
2
1
82. y = 3 x + 1 and y = x − 1
3
83. 3 x + 8 y = 7 and 5 x − 7 y = 0

105. Male femur length. In addition to the length of the
femur, the height of a male can also be estimated
from the length of the tibia (inner and larger of the
two bones of the lower leg). The height H of a male
is related to the length x of their tibia by the formula
H = 2.42 x + 81.83, where all measurements are in
centimeters. Estimate the height (in feet) of a male
whose tibia measured 43 cm.
106. Female femur length. In addition to the length of the
femur, the height of a female can also be estimated from the
length of the tibia (inner and larger of the two bones of the
lower leg). The height H of a female is related to the length x
of their tibia by the formula H = 2.9 x + 61.53, where all
measurements are in centimeters. Estimate the height (in feet)
of a female whose tibia measured 36 cm.
107. Dance class. A dance teacher runs a modern dance class
for 12 weeks. The class meets each week in a rented dance
studio and the teacher has to pay upfront all the costs
associated with renting the studio. Each student pays the
teacher a single fee for the course. The graph represents

206

Chapter 2 Graphs and Functions
the profit the teacher makes depending on the number of
students.
800

(16, 640)

Profit made (P dollars)

600
400

114. Golf club charges. Your golf club charges a yearly membership fee of $1000 and $35 per session of golf.

200
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
2200

Number of students (n)

2400

(0, 2750)

Prepaid amount
(P dollars)

a. What does the y-intercept represent?
b. What does the x-intercept represent?
c. What is the teacher’s profit if there are 16 students in
the class?
d. Write a linear equation for the profit P the teacher makes
depending on the number of students n.
108. Prepaid cellphone. A cellphone is loaded with a prepaid
SIM card with initial airtime credit for calls. The company
charges a flat fee per minute of calling within the continental United States. The graph represents the prepaid amount
depending on usage of the cellphone.
15
12
9
6
3

115. Paying off a refrigerator. You bought a new refrigerator
for $700. You made a down payment of $100 and promised
to pay $15 per month. (Ignore interest.)
116. Converting currency. In 2021, according to the
International Monetary Fund, 1 U.S. dollar equaled 72.5
Indian rupees. Convert currency from rupees to dollars.

2600
2800

In Exercises 113–117, write an equation of a line in slope–
intercept form. To describe this situation, interpret (a) the
variables x and y and (b) the meaning of the slope and the
y-intercept.
113. Christmas savings account. You currently have $130 in
a Christmas savings account. You deposit $7 per week into
this account. (Ignore interest.)

(0, 15)

(75, 0)
20

40

60

80

Number of minutes (t)

a. What does the y-intercept represent?
b. What does the x-intercept represent?
c. Write a linear equation for the amount left on the SIM
card P depending on the time the cellphone was used.
d. What is the cost per minute of calling from this cellphone?
109. Jet takeoff. Upon takeoff, a jet climbs to 4 miles as it
passes over 40 miles of land below it. Find the slope of the
jet’s climb.
110. Road gradient. Driving down the Smoky Mountains
in Tennessee, Samantha descends 2000 feet in elevation
while moving 4 miles horizontally away from a high point
on the straight road. Find the slope (gradient) of the road
( 1 mile = 5280 feet ).
111. Trimming the bush. John noticed that it is springtime and
that the hedge by his window has been growing. It grew
8 inches in two weeks. How often does John need to trim
his hedge to be sure that it doesn’t grow more than 6 inches
between trimmings?
112. Taking a bath. Miguel is preparing to take a bath. He sees
that it takes 2 minutes to raise the bathtub water level by
5 inches. His bathtub is 36 inches deep, so he has 31 more
inches left before water overflows. How much time does he
have left before the water overflows?

117. Life expectancy. In 2010, the life expectancy of a female
born in the United States was 80.8 years and was increasing at a rate of 0.17 year per year. (Assume that this rate of
increase remains constant.)
118. Depreciating a tractor. The value v of a tractor purchased for $14,000 and depreciated linearly at the rate of
$1400 per year is given by v = −1400t + 14, 000, where
t represents the number of years since the purchase. Find
the value of the tractor after a. two years and b. six years.
When will the tractor have no value?
119. Data usage. Your monthly data limit on your cellphone
plan is 1 gigabyte ( 1 GB = 1024 MB ). By the end of June
13, you realized you have used up 435 MB of your quota.
Assuming you plan to keep your usage patterns, will your
limit be enough, or will you have to buy extra data by the
end of June?
120. Car trip. You set out on a trip from your hometown to a
vacation spot located 520 miles away. You started driving
at 9 a.m. and by 12 p.m. you have realized you traveled
195 miles. Assuming your driving patterns continue, what
time will you arrive at your destination?
121. Playing a concert. A famous band is considering playing a concert and charging $40,000 plus $5 per person
attending the concert. Write an equation relating the
income y of the band to the number x of people attending
the concert.
122. Car rental. The U Drive car rental agency charges $30.00
per day and $0.25 per mile.
a. Find an equation relating the cost C of renting a car from
U Drive for a one-day trip covering x miles.
b. Draw the graph of the equation in part a.
c. How much does it cost to rent the car for one day
covering 60 miles?
d. How many miles were driven if the one-day rental cost
was $47.75?
123. Fahrenheit and Celsius. In the Fahrenheit temperature
scale, water boils at 212 ° F and freezes at 32 ° F. In the
Celsius scale, water boils at 100 ° C and freezes at 0 ° C.
Assume that the Fahrenheit temperature F and Celsius
temperature C are linearly related.
a. Find the equation in slope–intercept form relating F and
C, with C as the independent variable.

Section 2.3 Lines
b. What is the meaning of slope in part a?
c. Find the Fahrenheit temperatures, to the nearest degree,
corresponding to 40 ° C, 25 ° C, − 5 ° C, and −10 ° C.
d. Find the Celsius temperatures, to the nearest degree,
corresponding to 100 ° F, 90 ° F, 75 ° F, −10 ° F, and
−20 ° F.
e. The normal body temperature in humans ranges from
97.6 ° F to 99.6 ° F. Convert this temperature range to
degrees Celsius.
f. When is the Celsius temperature the same numerical
value as the Fahrenheit temperature?
124. Cost. The cost of producing four customized skateboard
decks is $210.20, and the cost of producing ten customized
skateboard decks is $348.80.
a. Write a linear equation in slope–intercept form relating cost to the number of customized skateboard decks
produced. Sketch a graph of the equation.
b. What is the practical meaning of the slope and the intercepts of the equation in part a?
c. Predict the cost of producing 12 customized skateboard
decks.
125. Prison population. The number of prisoners in a state’s
prisons dropped from 100,942 in 2014 to 96,512 in 2019.
a. Find a linear equation relating the number y of prisoners
to the year t. (Take t = 0 to represent 2014.)
b. Draw the graph of the equation from part a.
c. How many prisoners were there in 2017?
d. Predict the number of prisoners in 2025.
126. Viewers of a TV show. After five months, the number
of viewers of a new cable show on TV was 5.73 million. After
eight months, the number of viewers of the show rose to
6.27 million. Assume that the linear model applies.
a. Write an equation expressing the number of viewers V
after x months.
b. Interpret the slope and the intercepts of the line in
part a.
c. Predict the number of viewers of the show after
11 months.
127. Health insurance coverage. The number of people in the
United States not covered by health insurance in 2015 was
about 29 million. That number rose to 31 million by 2020.
Use the linear model to predict the number of people in the
United States who will not be covered by health insurance in
2025. (Source: www.healthaffairs.org)
128. Oil consumption. The total world consumption of oil
increased from 86.4 million barrels per day in 2010 to
97.1 million barrels per day in 2021. Create a linear model
involving a relation between the year and the daily oil consumption in that year. Let t = 0 represent the year 2010.
(Source: www.statista.com)

b. Use a graphing utility to plot the points and graph the
regression line.
c. Approximately how many papers will be sold if the price
per copy is 35¢?
130. Sales and advertising. Bildwell Computers keeps a careful record of its weekly advertising expenses (in thousands
of dollars) and the number of computers (in thousands) it
sells the following week. The table shows the data the
company collected.
Weekly Advertising
Expenses (in
thousands of dollars)

100

200

300

400

500

600

Sales the Following
Week (in thousands)

21

29

36

49

58

67

a. Use a graphing utility to find the equation of the line
of regression equation relating the variables x (weekly
advertising expenses in thousands of dollars) and y (sales
the following week, in thousands).
b. Use a graphing utility to plot the points and graph the
regression line.
c. Approximately how many thousands of computers
will be sold if the company spends $700,000 on
advertising?

Beyond the Basics
131. The graph of a line has slope m = 3. If P ( −2, 3 ) and
Q ( 1, c ) are points on the graph, find c.
132. Find a real number c such that the line 3 x − cy − 2 = 0
has a y-intercept of −4.
In Exercises 133–134, show that the three given points are
collinear by using (a) slopes and (b) the distance formula.
133. ( 0, 1 ), ( 1, 3 ), and ( −1, −1 )
134. ( 1, 0.5 ), ( 2, 0 ), and ( 0.5, 0.75 )
135. Show that the triangle with vertices A( 1, 1 ), B ( −1, 4 ),
and C ( 5, 8 ) is a right triangle by using a slopes and b the
Pythagorean Theorem.
136. Show that the four points A( −4, −1 ), B ( 1, 2 ), C ( 3, 1 ),
and, D ( −2, − 2 ) are the vertices of a parallelogram.
		[Hint: Opposite sides of a parallelogram are parallel.]
137. In the accompanying figure, note that lines  1 and  2
have slopes m1 and m 2. Assume that  1 and  2 are parallel. Deduce that ABCD is a parallelogram and that
triangles ABD and CDB are congruent, with AB = CD.
Deduce that m1 = m 2 .
y

l2

129. Newspaper sales. The table shows the number of newspapers (in thousands) that sell at a given price (in nickels)
per copy for the college newspaper Midstate Oracle at
Midstate College.
Price (nickels)

1

2

3

4

5

Number of Newspapers
Sold (thousands)

11

8

6

4

3

a. Use a graphing utility to find the equation of the line of
regression relating the variable x (price in nickels) and y
(number sold in thousands).

207

C

D

A
O

l1

B
x

208

Chapter 2 Graphs and Functions

138. In the accompanying figure, note that lines  1 and  2
have slopes m1 and m 2. Assume that  1 and  2 are perpendicular. Show that the right triangles OKA and BLO
are similar and from that deduce that m1 ⋅ m 2 = −1.

y
24
16

(25, 12)

y
d
l1 ; m1 5 c
A(c, d)

c
l2 ; m2 5 – d
B(2d, c)

d

O

c

(0, 0)

0

8

16

x

28

d

c

L(2d, 0)

216 28

8

216

K(c, 0) x

144. Geometry. Show that xx 1 + yy1 = a 2 is an equation of
the tangent line to the circle x 2 + y 2 = a 2 at the point
( x 1 , y1 ) on the circle.
In Exercises 145–148, use a graphing device to graph the
given lines on the same screen. Interpret your observations
about the family of lines.
145. y = 2 x + b for b = 0, ± 2, ± 4

139. Geometry. Use a coordinate plane to prove that if two
sides of a quadrilateral are congruent (equal in length)
and parallel, then so are the other two sides.
140. Geometry. Use a coordinate plane to prove that the
midpoints of the four sides of a quadrilateral are the
vertices of a parallelogram.
141. Geometry. Find the coordinates of the point B of a line
segment AB, given that A = ( 2, 2 ), d ( A, B ) = 12.5, and
4
the slope of the line segment AB is .
3
142. Geometry. Show that an equation of a circle with
( x 1 , y1 ) and ( x 2 , y 2 ) as endpoints of a diameter can be
written in the form
( x − x 1 )( x − x 2 ) + ( y − y1 )( y − y 2 ) = 0.

		[Hint: Use the fact that when the two endpoints of a diameter and any other point on the circle are used as vertices
for a triangle, the angle opposite the diameter is a right
angle.]
(x, y)

(x1, y1)

146. y = mx + 2 for m = 0, ± 2, ± 4
147. y = m ( x − 1 ) for m = 0, ± 3, ± 5
148. y = m ( x + 1 ) − 2 for m = 0, ± 3, ± 5

Critical Thinking / Discussion / Writing
149. a. 
The equation y + 2 x + k = 0 describes a family
of lines for each value of k. Sketch the graphs of the
members of this family for k = −3, 0, and 2. What
is the common characteristic of the family?
b. 
Repeat part a for the family of lines y + kx + 4 = 0.
150. Explain how you can determine the sign of the
x-coordinate of the point of intersection of the lines
y = m1 x + b1 and y = m 2 x + b 2 , if
a. m1 > m 2 > 0 and b1 > b 2 .
b. m1 > m 2 > 0 and b1 < b 2 .
c. m1 < m 2 < 0 and b1 > b 2 .
d. m1 < m 2 < 0 and b1 < b 2 .

Active Learning

(x2, y2)

143. Geometry. Find an equation of the tangent line to the
circle x 2 + y 2 = 169 at the point ( −5, 12 ). (See the
accompanying figure.)

151. Explorations: Finding Equations of a Line
Perpendicular to a Given Line. Open the
GeoGebra applet using the attached QR code or
bitly link.
a. Change the values of the coefficients A, B, and C and for
the line g having equation Ax + By + C = 0, and note the
effect on the equation and graph of g. Then check the
box below the coefficient boxes to see the slope-intercept
form of the equation for g.
b. Drag the point P to see the dashed line h through
P perpendicular to g.
c. As you click the box next to the slope intercept form of
the equation for g new boxes appear that let you experiment with various equations for h, as you drag P. Be sure
to then change the equation for g and explore the effects
on the equation and graph of h.

Section 2.4 Functions

GETTING READY

for the Next Section

REVIEW CONCEPTS
Graphs of equations (Section 2.2, page 180)
Solving inequalities (Section 1.6, page 143)
Solving equations (Section 1.1, Section 1.3)
In Exercises GR1–GR4, solve each equation for x.
GR1. x 2 − 4 = 0
GR2. 1 − x 2 = 0

GR7.

−( a + h ) 2 + a 2
h

GR8.

1
h

( a +1 h − 1a )

Solve linear and quadratic inequalities (Section 1.6)
In Exercises GR9–GR10, solve each inequality.
GR9. ( x − 1 )( x − 3 ) < 0

GR3. x 2 − x − 2 = 0
GR4.

Add and subtract polynomials (Section P.3, page 31)
In Exercises GR5–GR8, simplify each expression.
GR5. ( 3( a + h ) + 1) − ( 3a + 1 )
GR6. ( 2( a + h ) 2 + 1 ) − ( 2a 2 + 1 )

REVIEW SKILLS

x2

209

+ 2x − 3 = 0

GR10. x 2 − 2 x − 3 ≥ 0

2.4

Functions
Objectives

Videos for
this Section

1

Use functional notation and find function values.

2

Find the domain and range of a function.

3

Identify the graph of a function.

4

Get information about a function from its graph.

5

Solve applied problems by using functions.

The Ups and Downs of Drug Levels
Medicines in the form of a pill have
a much harder time getting to
work than you do. First, they are
swallowed and dumped into a
pool of acid in your stomach. Then
they dissolve; leave the stomach;
and begin to be absorbed, mostly
through the lining of the small
intestine. Next, the blood around
the intestine carries the medicines
to the liver, an organ designed to
metabolize (break down) and
remove foreign material from the
blood. Because of this property of
the liver, most drugs have a tough time getting past it. The amount of drug that makes it into your
bloodstream, compared with the amount that you put in your mouth, is called the drug’s bioavailability.
If a drug has low bioavailability, then much of the drug is destroyed before it reaches the bloodstream.
The amount of drug you take in a pill is calculated to correct for this deficiency so that the amount you
need actually ends up in your blood.
Once the drugs are past the liver, the bloodstream carries them throughout the rest of the
body in about one minute. The study of the ways drugs are absorbed and move through the

210

Chapter 2 Graphs and Functions
body is called pharmacokinetics, or PK for short. PK measures the ups and downs of drug levels
in your body. In Example 10, we consider an application of functions to the levels of drugs in the
bloodstream.
(Adapted from The Ups and Downs of Drug Levels, by Bob Munk, www.thebody.com/content/
treat/art1062.html)

Objective 1

Functions
There are many ways of expressing a relationship between two quantities. For example,
if you are paid $10 per hour, then the relation between the number of hours, x, that you
work and the amount of money, y, that you earn may be expressed by the equation
y = 10 x. Replacing x with 40 yields y = 400 and indicates that 40 hours of work corresponds to a $400 paycheck. A special relationship such as y = 10 x in which to each
element x in one set there corresponds a unique element y in another set is called a function. We say that your pay is a function of the number of hours you work. Because the
value of y depends on the value of x, y is called the dependent variable and x is called
the independent variable. Any symbol may be used for the dependent and independent
variables.

SIDE NOTE

Function

The range of a function from
a set X to a set Y does not
necessarily have to be the
entire set Y.

A function from a set X to a set Y is a rule that assigns to each element of X exactly
one element of Y . The set X is the domain of the function. The set of those elements
of Y that correspond (are assigned) to the elements of X is the range of the function.

SIDE NOTE
If a correspondence diagram
defines a function, then the
situation

As an example of an assignment that is not a function, consider the correspondence
between U.S. and European airports. A U.S. airport is connected to a European airport
if there is a direct flight between them. This is not a function because, for instance, the
New York airport is connected by a direct flight to London, Paris, Barcelona, and other
airports.
A rule of assignment may be described by a correspondence diagram, in which an
arrow points from each domain element to the corresponding element or elements in the
range.
To decide whether a correspondence diagram defines a function, we must check
whether any domain element is paired with more than one range element. If, for some element of X, there are two or more corresponding elements of Y , then the relation is not a
function. See the correspondence diagrams in Figure 2.36.

(a) is allowed.

(b) is not allowed.

a

1

a

1

b

2

b

2

c

3

c

3

d

4

d

4

Y

X

Y

X

A function

Not a function

Domain: {a, b, c, d}
Range: {1, 3, 4}
(a)

(b)

Figure 2.36

Correspondence diagrams

Section 2.4 Functions

211

Main Facts From the Definition of a Function
Let f be a function from a set X to a set Y.
1. The domain of f is the entire set X. That is, each element of X must be assigned to
some element of Y.
2. The range of f is the set of those elements in Y that are assigned to some element
of X. So the range of f may not be the entire set Y.
3. It is permissible to assign the same element of Y to two or more elements of X.
See Figure 2.36(a).
4. It is not permissible to assign an element of X to two or more elements of Y. See
Figure 2.36(b).

Function Notation

DO YOU KNOW?
The functional notation y = f ( x )
was first used by the great Swiss
mathematician Leonhard Euler
in the Commentarii Academia
Petropolitanae, published in 1735.
x
Input
f

Figure 2.37
a machine

Output
f (x)

The function f, as

WARNING

We usually use single letters such as f , F , g, G, h, and H as the name of a function. Some
special function names use more than one letter, like sin (the sine function) and log (the
logarithm function). If we choose f as the name of a function, then for each x in the
domain of f , there corresponds a unique y in its range. The number y is denoted by f ( x ),
read as “ f of x” or as “ f at x.” We call f ( x ) the value of f at the number x and say that
f assigns the value f ( x ) to x.
If the function shown in Figure 2.36(a) is named f, then the correspondence diagram
may be described by
f ( a ) = 1, f ( b ) = 3, f ( c ) = 3, and f ( d ) = 4.
Another way to illustrate the concept of a function is by visualizing a “machine,” as
shown in Figure 2.37. If x is in the domain of a function, then the machine accepts x as an
“input” and produces the value f ( x ) as the “output.” A hand-held bar code scanner that
reads the bar codes and outputs the price of items is an example of a function.

In writing y = f ( x ), do not confuse f, which is the name of the function, with f ( x ), which is a
number in the range of f that the function assigns to x.
The symbol f ( x ) does not mean “ f times x.”

Representations of Functions
Functions can be prescribed in many ways: directly by describing the assignment to each
element of the domain, by formula, or by algorithm.

Functions Defined by Ordered Pairs If the value of a function f at x is y, we can
write this assignment as an ordered pair ( x, y ). A function can be defined by listing all the
ordered pairs that correspond to all assignments made by this function. In general, any set
of ordered pairs is called a relation. The set of first components is the domain of the relation,
and the set of second components is the range of the relation. Not every relation is a function. Only relations in which each element of the domain corresponds to exactly one element of the range is a function. In other words, a function is a relation in which no two
distinct ordered pairs have the same first component.
EXAMPLE 1

Functions Defined by Ordered Pairs

Determine whether each relation defines a function.
a. r = {( −1, 2 ), ( 1, 3 ), ( 5, 2 ), ( −1, −3 ) }
b. s = {( −2, 1 ), ( 0, 2 ), ( 2, 1 ), ( −1, −3 ) }

212

Chapter 2 Graphs and Functions

Solution
a. The domain of the relation r is { −1, 1, 5 }, and its range is { 2, 3, −3 }. It is not a function because the ordered pairs ( −1, 2 ) and ( −1, −3 ) have the same first component.
See the correspondence diagram for relation r in Figure 2.38.
b. The domain of the relation s is { −2, −1, 0, 2 }, and its range is { −3, 1, 2 }. The relation s is a function because no two ordered pairs of s have the same first component.
Figure 2.39 shows the correspondence diagram for the function s.

22
2

21

23
21

1

3

5

23

1

0

2

2
s
A function

r
Not a function

Figure 2.38

Figure 2.39

Practice Problem 1. Repeat Example 1 for the ordered pairs:
a. R = {( 2, 1 ), ( −2, 1 ), ( 3, 2 ) }.
b. S = {( 2, 5 ), ( 3, − 2 ), ( 3, 5 ) }.
TABLE 2.6

Functions Defined by Tables and Graphs Tables and graphs can be used to

x

y = r( x )

−1
1
5

2
3
2
−3

−1
Relation r

describe relations and functions. We can display in a tabular form the list of ordered pairs
( x, y ) of a relation, where x is in the domain and the corresponding y is in the range.

For example, the relations r and s of Example 1 described in tabular form are shown in
Tables 2.6 and 2.7, respectively.
Alternatively, we can display geometrically the list of ordered pairs ( x, y ) in a relation
by plotting each pair ( x, y ) as a point in the coordinate plane. The geometric display is the
graph of the relation. Graphs of relations r and s are given in Figure 2.40.
y

TABLE 2.7
y = s( x )

−2
−1
0
2

1

2

−3
2
1

1

Relation s

y

3

x

21 0
21

2

1

2

3

4

5 x

23 22

0
21

1

2

3 x

22

22
23

y 5 s(x)
(b)

y 5 r(x)
(a)

Figure 2.40

Graphs of relations

The graph of the points in the table is called a scatterplot.

Functions Defined by Equations When the relation defined by an equation in two
variables is a function, we can often solve the equation for the dependent variable in terms
of the independent variable. For example, the equation y − x 2 = 0 can be solved for y in
terms of x:
y = x 2.

Section 2.4 Functions
SIDE NOTE
The definition of a function is
independent of the letters used
to denote the function and the
variables. For example,
s( x ) =

x 2 , g( y ) =

y 2,

and h ( t ) = t 2
represent the same function.
3

Now we can replace the dependent variable, in this case, y, with functional notation f ( x )
and express the function defined by the equation y − x 2 = 0 as
f ( x ) = x 2 ( read “ f of x equals x 2 ” ).
Here f ( x ) plays the role of y and is the value of the function f at x. For example, if x = 3
is an element (input value) in the domain of f , the corresponding element (output value) in
the range is found by replacing x with 3 in the equation
f ( x ) = x 2,
so that

Input

f ( 3 ) = 3 2 = 9.

Replace x with 3.

We say that the value of the function f at 3 is 9 or that 9 is the evaluated function value
f ( 3 ). See Figure 2.41. In other words, the number 9 in the range corresponds to the number 3 in the domain, and the ordered pair ( 3, 9 ) is an ordered pair of the function f .
If a function g is defined by an equation such as y = x 2 − 6 x + 8, the notations

Output

y = x 2 − 6 x + 8 and
Figure 2.41
machine

213

The function f, as a

g( x ) = x 2 − 6 x + 8

define the same function.

EXAMPLE 2

Determining Whether an Equation Defines a Function

In each equation, determine whether y is a function of x.
a. 6 x 2 − 3 y = 12
b. y 2 − x 2 = 4

Solution
Solve each equation for y in terms of x. If more than one value of y corresponds to the
same value of x, then y is not a function of x.
a.

6 x 2 − 3 y = 12

Original equation

6 x 2 − 3 y + 3 y − 12 = 12 + 3 y − 12
6 x 2 − 12 =
2x 2 − 4

= y

y =

b.

y2 − x2 = 4
y2 − x2 + x2 = 4 + x2

2
y 5 f1(x) 5 Ïx 2
x
y 5 f2(x) 5 2 Ïx 2

Figure 2.42

2x 2 − 4

Simplify.
Divide by 3.
Interchange sides.

The last equation shows that only one value of y corresponds to each value of x. For
example, if x = 0, then y = 0 − 4 = −4. So y is a function of x.

y

22

3y

Add 3 y − 12 to both sides.

Original equation
Add x 2 to both sides.

y2 = x2 + 4

Simplify.

y = ± x2 + 4

Square root property

The last equation shows that two values of y correspond to each value of x. For example,
if x = 0, then y = ± 0 2 + 4 = ± 4 = ±2. Both y = 2 and y = −2 correspond
to x = 0. Therefore, y is not a function of x. However, the equation y 2 − x 2 = 4
defines two functions:
f1 ( x ) = x 2 + 4; domain: ( −∞, ∞ ); range: [ 2, ∞ ), and
f 2 ( x ) = − x 2 + 4; domain: ( −∞, ∞ ); range ( −∞, − 2 ]. See Figure 2.42.
Practice Problem 2. In each equation, determine whether y is a function of x.
a. 2 x 2 − y 2 = 1
b. x − 2 y = 5


214

Chapter 2 Graphs and Functions

EXAMPLE 3

Evaluating a Function

Let g be the function defined by the equation
y = x 2 − 6 x + 8.
Find each function value.
1
a. g ( 3 )  b. g ( −2 )  c. g
  d. g ( a + 2 )  e. g ( x + h )
2

( )

Solution
Because the function is named g, we replace y with g( x ) and write
g( x ) = x 2 − 6x + 8

Replace y with g ( x ).

In this notation, the independent variable x is a placeholder. We can write
g( x ) = x 2 − 6 x + 8 as
g( ) = ( ) 2 − 6 ( ) + 8.
a. g ( x ) = ( x ) 2 − 6( x ) + 8
2

g ( 3 ) = ( 3 ) − 6( 3 ) + 8
= 9 − 18 + 8 = −1

The given equation
Replace x with 3 at each occurrence of x.
Simplify.

The statement g(3) = −1 means that the value of the function g at 3 is −1.
Just as in part a, we can evaluate g at any value x in its domain.
g( x ) = x 2 − 6x + 8

Original equation

2

b. g ( −2 ) = ( −2 ) − 6 ( −2 ) + 8 = 24
c. g

( 12 ) = ( 12 ) − 6( 12 ) + 8 = 214
2

d. g ( a + 2 ) = ( a + 2 ) 2 − 6 ( a + 2 ) + 8

Replace x with − 2 and simplify.
Replace x with

1
and simplify.
2

Replace x with ( a + 2 ) in g ( x ).

= a 2 + 4 a + 4 − 6a − 12 + 8

Recall: ( x + y ) 2 = x 2 + 2 xy + y 2 .

= a 2 − 2a

Simplify.

2
e. g ( x + h ) = ( x + h ) − 6 ( x + h ) + 8

= x 2 + 2 xh + h 2 − 6 x − 6h + 8

Replace x with ( x + h ) in g ( x ).
Simplify.

Practice Problem 3. Let g be the function defined by the equation y = −2 x 2 + 5 x.
Find each function value.
a. g(0)
b. g(−1)
c. g( x + h)



y
22

EXAMPLE 4

f (x) 5 x3 2 3x 1 4
T
S

Finding the Area of a Rectangle

In Figure 2.43, find the area of the rectangle PLMN.

Solution
2
0

L
1

Figure 2.43

Area of the rectangle PLMN = ( length )( height )
P = ( 1, f ( 1 ) )
= ( 3 − 1 )( f ( 1 ) )

N

P

M
2

3

x

= ( 2 )( 2 )

f ( 1 ) = 1 3 − 3( 1 ) + 4 = 2

= 4 square units
Practice Problem 4. In Figure 2.43, find the area of the rectangle TLMS.

Section 2.4 Functions

Objective 2

215

The Domain of a Function
Sometimes a function is given by an equation without a predefined domain. In such cases,
we use the following agreement.

DO YOU KNOW?
The word domain comes from
the Latin word dominus, or
master, which in turn is related
to domus, meaning “home.”
Domus is also the root for the
words domestic and domicile.

Agreement on Domain
If the domain of a function that is defined by an equation is not specified, then we
agree that the domain of the function is the largest set of real numbers that results in
real numbers as outputs.

When we use our agreement to find the domain of a function, first we usually find the
values of the variable that do not result in real number outputs. Then we exclude those
numbers from the domain. Remember that
1. division by zero is undefined.
2. the square root (or any even root) of a negative number is not a real number.
SIDE NOTE
1
→ ≠ 0
, 

, 
→ ≥ 0
1
, 
→ > 0

The  represents any expression.

EXAMPLE 5

Finding the Domain of a Function

Find the domain of each function.
a. f ( x ) = 2 x + 7
d. h ( x ) =

1
x −1

1
1 − x2
e. P ( x ) = x 2 − x − 6

b. f ( x ) =

c. g ( x ) =

x+1

Solution
a. The function f puts no restrictions on the variable x. You can multiply any real number
by 2 and then add 7. So, the domain is the set of all real numbers, in interval notation
( −∞, ∞ ) .
b. The function f is not defined when the denominator 1 − x 2 is 0. Because 1 − x 2 = 0
if x = 1 or x = −1, the domain of f is the set {x | x ≠ −1 and x ≠ 1}, which in
interval notation is written as ( −∞, −1 ) ∪ ( −1, 1 ) ∪ ( 1, ∞ ).
c. Because the square root of a negative number is not a real number, x + 1 is a
real number only if x + 1 ≥ 0, or x ≥ −1. The domain of g is {x| x ≥ −1}, or in
interval notation [ −1, ∞ ).
1
d. The function h ( x ) =
has two restrictions. The square root of a negative
x −1
number is not a real number, so x − 1 is a real number only if x − 1 ≥ 0.
However, we cannot allow x − 1 = 0 because x − 1 is in the denominator.
Therefore, we must have x − 1 > 0, or x > 1. The domain of h is { x x > 1 }, or
in interval notation ( 1, ∞ ).
e. The function P ( x ) is defined when the expression under the radical sign is
nonnegative. You can use the test-point method (see Section 1.6) to see that
x 2 − x − 6 = ( x + 2 )( x − 3 ) ≥ 0 on the two intervals ( −∞, − 2 ] and [ 3, ∞ ).
So the domain of the function P ( x ) in interval notation is ( −∞, − 2 ] ∪ [ 3, ∞ ).
sign of (x + 2 )(x – 3): + + + + +0 – – – – – – – – – 0 + + + +

–2
Test points

–3

3
0

Practice Problem 5. Find the domain of each function.
1
a. f ( x ) = 3 x − 5  b. f ( x ) =
.  c. g( x ) =
1− x

4

x 2 + 2 x − 3

216

Chapter 2 Graphs and Functions

The Range of a Function
Suppose a function f is defined by an equation. A number y is in the range of f if the
equation f ( x ) = y has at least one solution.
EXAMPLE 6

Finding the Range of a Function

Let f ( x ) = x 2 with domain X = [ 3, 5 ].
a. Is 10 in the range of f ?
b. Is 4 in the range of f ?
c. Find the range of f .

Solution
a. We find possible solutions of the equation
f ( x ) = 10
x 2 = 10

Replace f ( x ) with x 2 .

x = ± 10.

Square root property

Because 3 < 10 < 5, the number x = 10 is in the interval X = [ 3, 5 ]. So the
equation f ( x ) = 10 has at least one solution in the domain of f . Therefore, 10 is in
the range of f .
b. The solutions of the equation x 2 = 4 are x = ±2. Neither of these numbers is in the
domain X = [ 3, 5 ]. So 4 is not in the range of f .
c. The range of f is the interval [ 9, 25 ] because for each number y in the interval [ 9, 25 ],
the number x = y is in the interval [ 3, 5 ] so that f ( x ) = f ( y ) = ( y ) 2 = y .
9 ≤ y ≤ 25
3 =

9 ≤

y ≤

25 = 5

3 ≤x ≤ 5

Because y is positive, we can take
square roots of both sides.

Practice Problem 6. Repeat Example 6 for f ( x ) = x 2 with domain X = [ −3, 3 ].
x+1
is more complicated. We discuss
x−2
this problem in Section 2.9 (See Example 7, page 293). In calculus, we will learn how to
find the range of any function given by an equation.
Finding the range of a function such as f ( x ) =

Objective 3
y

x5a
(a, b)

(a, c)
O

a

x

Figure 2.44 Graph does not
represent a function.

Graphs of Functions
The graph of a function f is the set of ordered pairs ( x, f ( x ) ) such that x is in the domain
of f. That is, the graph of f is the graph of the equation y = f ( x ). We sketch the graph of
y = f ( x ) by plotting points and joining them with a smooth curve. The graph of a function provides valuable visual information about the function.
Figure 2.44 shows that not every curve in the plane is the graph of a function. In this
figure, a vertical line x = a intersects the curve at two distinct points ( a, b ) and ( a, c ).
This curve cannot be the graph of y = f ( x ) for any function f because having f ( a ) = b
and f ( a ) = c means that f assigns two different range values to the same domain element
a. We express this statement, called the vertical-line test, as follows:
Vertical-Line Test
If no vertical line intersects the graph of a relation at more than one point, then the
graph of the relation is the graph of a function.

Section 2.4 Functions

EXAMPLE 7

217

Testing for Functions

Determine which graphs in Figure 2.45 are graphs of functions.
y

y

y

y

x

O
x

0

(a)

Figure 2.45

x

O

(b)

(c)

O

x

(d)

The vertical-line test

Solution
The graphs in Figures 2.45(a) and 2.45(b) are not graphs of functions because a vertical
line can be drawn through the two points farthest to the left in Figure 2.45(a) and the y-axis
is one of many vertical lines that contain more than one point on the graph in Figure
2.45(b). The graphs in Figures 2.45(c) and 2.45(d) are the graphs of functions because no
vertical line intersects either graph at more than one point.

y

Practice Problem 7. Decide whether the graph in Figure 2.46 is the graph of a
function.

0

x

Function Information from Its Graph
Given a graph in the xy-plane, we use the vertical-line test to determine whether the graph
is that of a function. We can also obtain the following additional information from the
graph of a function.

Figure 2.46

Objective 4

1. Point on a graph
A point ( a, b ) on the graph of f means that a is in the domain of f and the value of f at
a is b; that is, f ( a ) = b. We can visually determine whether a given point is on the
graph of a function. In Figure 2.47, the point ( a, b ) is on the graph of f and the point
( c, d ) is not on the graph of f.
y
Not on the graph because
f (c) ± d
(c, d )

d
f (a) 5 b
f (c)

(a, b) is on the graph
y 5 f (x)

y
d
Range of f

(c, d)

b

(c, f (c))

c

b 5 f (a)

a

x

y 5 f (x)

Figure 2.47
(a, b)
a Domain of f c x

Figure 2.48
range of f

Domain and

2. Domain and range from a graph
To determine the domain of a function, we look for the portion on the x-axis that is used
in graphing f. We can find this portion by projecting (collapsing) the graph onto the
x-axis. This projection is the domain of f.
The range of f is the projection of its graph onto the y-axis. See Figure 2.48.

218

Chapter 2 Graphs and Functions

EXAMPLE 8

Finding the Domain and Range from a Graph

Use the graphs in Figure 2.49 to find the domain and range of each function.
y

y
4
2
0

(1, 4)
(3, 3)

2

(2, 2)
2

4

(3, 4)

4

x

(a)

0

(1, 1)
2

4

x

(b)

Figure 2.49

y
6
4

(1, 3)

2
0

2

4

6

Figure 2.50

Solution
a. In Figure 2.49(a), the open circle at ( −2, 1 ) indicates that the point ( −2, 1 ) does not
belong to the graph of f , while the full circle at the point (3, 3) indicates that the point
( 3, 3 ) is part of the graph. When we project the graph of y = f ( x ) onto the x-axis,
we obtain the interval ( −2, 3 ]. So, the domain of f in interval notation is ( −2, 3 ].
Similarly, the projection of the graph of f onto the y-axis gives the interval ( 1, 4 ],
which is the range of f .
b.
The projection of the graph of g in Figure 2.49(b) onto the x-axis is made up of the
x
two intervals [ −3, 1 ] and [ 3, ∞ ). So the domain of g is [ −3, 1 ] ∪ [ 3, ∞ ).
To find the range of g, we project its graph onto the y-axis. The projection of the line
segment joining ( −3, −1 ) and ( 1, 1 ) onto the y-axis is the interval [ −1, 1 ]. The projection of the horizontal ray starting at the point ( 3, 4 ) onto the y-axis is just a single point
at y = 4. Therefore, the range of g is [ −1, 1 ] ∪ { 4 } .
Practice Problem 8. Find the domain and range of the function whose graph is given in
Figure 2.50.

y

(c, f (c))

f (c)

c

Figure 2.51
graphically

x

Locating f ( c )

y
y

f (x)

3. Evaluations
a. Finding f ( c ) Given a number c in the domain of f , we find f ( c ) from the
graph of f .
First, locate the number c on the x-axis. Draw a vertical line through c. It intersects the graph at the point ( c, f ( c ) ). Through this point, draw a horizontal line
to intersect the y-axis. Read the value of f ( c ) on the y-axis. See Figure 2.51.
b. Solving f ( x ) = d Given d in the range of f , find values of x for which
f ( x ) = d. Locate the number d on the y-axis. Draw a horizontal line through d.
This line intersects the graph at point(s) ( x, d ). Through each of these points,
draw a vertical line to intersect the x-axis. Read the corresponding values of x
on the x-axis. These are the values of x for which f ( x ) = d. Figure 2.52 shows
three solutions: x 1 , x 2 , and x 3 of the equation f ( x ) = d.

d

EXAMPLE 9
x1 x2

x3

Figure 2.52 Graphically
solving f ( x ) = d

x

Examining the Graph of a Function

x 2 − 2 x − 3.

Let f ( x ) =
a. Is the point ( 1, − 3 ) on the graph of f ?
b. Find all values of x so that ( x, 5 ) is on the graph of f .
c. Find all y-intercepts of the graph of f .
d. Find all x-intercepts of the graph of f .

Section 2.4 Functions

219

Solution
a. We check whether ( 1, − 3 ) satisfies the equation y = x 2 − 2 x − 3.
?
( 1) 2 − 2 ( 1) − 3
−3 =

Replace x with 1 and y with −3.

?

−3 = −4 No!
So ( 1, − 3 ) is not on the graph of f . See Figure 2.53.
b. Substitute 5 for y in y = x 2 − 2 x − 3 and solve for x.

RECALL
Zero-product property
AB = 0 if and only if
A = 0 or B = 0.

5 = x 2 − 2x − 3
0 = x 2 − 2x − 8
0 = ( x − 4 )( x + 2 )
x − 4 = 0 or x + 2 = 0

Subtract 5 from both sides.
Factor.
Zero-product property

x = 4

Solve for x.

x = −2

or

The point ( x, 5 ) is on the graph of f only when x = −2 or x = 4. Both points ( −2, 5 )
and ( 4, 5 ) are on the graph of f . See Figure 2.53.
y
6
(22, 5)

(4, 5)

x-intercept

x-intercept
1
25

0
22
(21, 0)

(3, 0)
5 x

1
(1, 23)

(0, 23)
23

y-intercept

(1, 24)
25

y = x222x23

Figure 2.53

c. Find all points ( x, y ) with x = 0 in y = x 2 − 2 x − 3.
y = 0 2 − 2( 0 ) − 3

Replace x with 0 to find the y -intercept.

y = −3

Simplify.

The only y-intercept is −3. See Figure 2.53.
d. Find all points ( x, y ) with y = 0 in y = x 2 − 2 x − 3.
0 = x 2 − 2x − 3
0 = ( x + 1 )( x − 3 )
x +1= 0

or

x−3=0

x = −1 or

x=3

Factor.
Zero-product property
Solve for x.

The x-intercepts of the graph of f are −1 and 3. See Figure 2.53.
Practice Problem 9. Let f ( x ) = x 2 + 4 x − 5.
a. Is the point ( 2, 7 ) on the graph of f ?
b. Find all values of x so that ( x, −8 ) is on the graph of f .
c. Find the y-intercept of the graph of f .
d. Find any x-intercepts of the graph of f .

220

Chapter 2 Graphs and Functions

SUMMARY OF MAIN FACTS
A function is usually described in one or more of the following six ways:
• A correspondence diagram
Input
• A set of ordered pairs
x
• A table of values
First coordinate
• An equation or a formula
Independent variable
• A scatterplot or a graph
Domain
is the set of all inputs.
• In the words y is a function of x

Building Functions

Objective 5
y

Level of Drugs in Bloodstream When you take a dose of medication, the drug
level in the blood goes up quickly and soon reaches its peak, called C max (the maximum
concentration). As your liver or kidneys remove the drug, your blood’s drug levels drop
until the next dose enters your bloodstream. The lowest drug level is called the trough, or
C min (the minimum concentration). The ideal dose should be strong enough to be effective without causing too many side effects. We start by setting upper and lower limits on
the drug’s blood levels, shown by the two horizontal lines on a pharmacokinetics (PK)
graph. See Figure 2.54. The upper line represents the drug level at which people start to
develop serious side effects. The lower line represents the minimum drug level that provides the desired effect.

Unacceptable Upper Limit

Drug concentration

Cmax

Cmin
Unacceptable Lower Limit

0

Dose 1

Figure 2.54

Time

Dose 2

Drug levels

Output
y or f ( x )
Second coordinate
Dependent variable
Range is the set of all outputs.

t

EXAMPLE 10

Cholesterol-Reducing Drugs

Many drugs used to lower high blood cholesterol levels are called statins. These drugs,
along with proper diet and exercise, help prevent heart attacks and strokes. Recall from
the introduction to this section that bioavailability is the percent of a drug you have
ingested that makes it into your bloodstream. A statin with a bioavailability of 30% has
been prescribed for Boris to treat his cholesterol levels. He is to take 20 milligrams
daily. Every day his body filters out half the statin. Find the maximum concentration of
the statin in the bloodstream on each of the first ten days of using the drug and graph
the result.

Solution
Because the statin has 30% bioavailability and Boris takes 20 milligrams per day, the maximum concentration in the bloodstream is 30% of 20 milligrams, or 20 ( 0.3 ) = 6 milligrams
from each day’s prescription. Because half the statin is filtered out of the body each day, the
daily maximum concentration is
1(
previous days maximum concentration ) + 6.
2
So if C ( n ) denotes the maximum concentration on the nth day, then
(1)

C( n) =

1 (
C n − 1 ) + 6, C ( 0 ) = 0.
2

Equation (1) is an example of a recursive definition of a function.
Table 2.8 shows the maximum concentration of the drug for each of the first ten
days. After the first day, each number in the second column is computed (to three decimal places) by adding 6 to one-half the number above it. The graph of C ( t ) is shown in
Figure 2.55.

Section 2.4 Functions

221

TABLE 2.8
Maximum Concentration

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

6.000
9.000
10.500
11.250
11.625
11.813
11.907
11.954
11.977
11.989

y
12
Maximum concentration

Day

10

y = C(t)

8
6
0

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 t
Day

Figure 2.55 Maximum drug
concentration

The graph shows that the maximum concentration of the statin in the bloodstream
approaches 12 milligrams if Boris continues to take one pill every day.
Practice Problem 10. Use Table 2.8 in Example 10 to find the range of the function C ( t ).
Also compute C ( 11 ).
EXAMPLE 11

Cost of a Fiber-Optic Cable

Two points A and B are opposite each other on the banks of a straight river that is 500 feet
wide. The point D is on the same side as B but is 1200 feet up the river from B. The local
Internet cable company wants to lay a fiber-optic cable from A to D. The cost per foot of
cable is $5 per foot under water and $3 per foot on land. To save money, the company lays
the cable under water from A to P and then on land from P to D. Using Figure 2.56, write
the total cost C as a function of x.
B

P
x

D
1200 2 x

500

A

Figure 2.56

Solution
In Figure 2.56, we have
d ( A, P ) = AP = ( 500 ) 2 + x 2 feet
d ( P, D ) = PD = 1200 − x feet.

Pythagorean Theorem

So the total cost C is given by
C = 5( AP ) + 3( PD )
= 5 ( 500 ) 2 + x 2 + 3( 1200 − x ).
Practice Problem 11. Repeat Example 11, assuming that the cost is 30% more under
water than it is on land.

Functions in Economics
The important concepts of breaking even, earning a profit, and taking a loss in economics
will be discussed throughout this text. Here we define some of the elementary functions in
economics.

222

Chapter 2 Graphs and Functions

Let x represent the number of units of an item manufactured, and each item is sold at a
price of p dollars. Then the cost C ( x ) of producing x items includes the fixed cost (such
as rent, insurance, product design, setup, promotion, and overhead) and the variable cost
(which depends on the number of items produced at a certain cost per item).

Linear Cost Function A linear cost function C ( x ) is given by
C ( x ) = ( variable cost ) + ( fixed cost )
= ax + b,
where the fixed cost is b and the marginal cost (cost of producing each item) is a dollars
per item.
C( x)
Average cost, denoted by C ( x ), is defined by C ( x ) =
.
x

Linear Price–Demand Function Suppose x items can be sold (demanded) at a price
of p dollars per item. Then a linear demand function usually has the form
p ( x ) = −mx + d

Expressing p as a function of x

x ( p ) = −np + k.

Expressing x as a function of p

or

Both expressions indicate that a higher price will result in fewer items sold. The constants
m, d , n, and k depend on the given situation, with m > 0 and n > 0. A price–supply
function has the form p = S ( x ) or x = G ( p ), where a higher price results in a greater
supply of items.

Revenue Function R( x )
Revenue = ( Price per item )( Number of items sold )
R ( x ) = p ⋅ x = ( −mx + d ) x

p = p( x ) = −mx + d

Profit Function P ( x )
Profit = Revenue − Cost
P ( x ) = R( x ) − C ( x )
A manufacturing company will
(i) have a profit if P ( x ) > 0.
(ii) break even if P ( x ) = 0.
(iii) suffer a loss if P ( x ) < 0.

EXAMPLE 12

Breaking Even

Metro Entertainment Co. spent $100,000 on production costs for its off-Broadway play
Bride and Prejudice. Once the play runs, each performance costs $1000 per show and the
revenue from each show is $2400. Using x to represent the number of shows,
a. write the cost function C ( x ).
b. write the revenue function R ( x ).
c. write the profit function P ( x ).
d. determine how many showings of Bride and Prejudice must be held for Metro to
break even.

Solution
a. C ( x ) = ( Variable cost ) + ( Fixed cost )
= 1000 x + 100, 000

Section 2.4 Functions

223

b. R ( x ) = ( Revenue per show )( Number of shows )
= 2400 x
c. P ( x ) = R ( x ) − C ( x )
= 2400 x − ( 1000 x + 100, 000 )
= 2400 x − 1000 x − 100, 000 = 1400 x − 100, 000
d. Metro will break even when P ( x ) = 0.
1400 x − 100, 000 = 0
1400 x = 100, 000
100, 000
x =
≈ 71.4
1400

Divide both sides by 1400.

Only a whole number of shows is possible, so Metro needs 72 shows to break even.
Practice Problem 12. Suppose in Example 12 that once the play runs, each performance
costs $1200 and the revenue from each show is $2500. How do the results in Example 12
change?

2.4

Exercises

Videos for
select exercises

Concepts and Vocabulary
1. In the functional notation y = f ( x ), x is the
variable.
2. If f ( −2 ) = 7, then −2 is in the
tion f and 7 is in the

11.
of the func-

of f.

3. If the point ( 9, −14 ) is on the graph of a function f, then
f ( 9) =
.
4. If ( 3, 7 ) and ( 3, 0 ) are points on a graph, then the graph cannot be the graph of a(n)
.
5. True or False. Every relation is a function.

Building Skills

10.

a

d

b

e

c

f

a

d

b

e

c

f

b

2

c

3

d

4

a
1
b
2

c
d

3

13. x
y

In Exercises 9–14, determine the domain and range of each
relation. Explain why each nonfunction is not a function.
9.

1

12.

1
6. True or False. If a and b are in the domain of f ( x ) = ,
x
then a + b is also in the domain of f .
7. True or False. If x = −7, then −x is in the domain of
f ( x ) = x.
1
8. True or False. The domain of f ( x ) =
is all real
x
+2
x, x ≠ −2.

a

8

0

3

8

−1 −2 −3

0

3

1

2

2

0

1

2

3

1

0

−3 −8

14. x −3 −1
y

−8

0

In Exercises 15–28, determine whether each equation defines
y as a function of x.
15. x + y = 2
16. x = y − 1
17. y =

1
x

18. xy = −1

19. y 2 = x 2
21. y =

1
2x − 5

23. 2 − y = 3 x

20. x = y
1
x2 − 1
24. 3 x − 5 y = 15
22. y =

224

Chapter 2 Graphs and Functions

25. x + y 2 = 8

26. x = y 2

+ y3

28. x + y 3

27. x 2

= 5

In Exercises 49–54, use the vertical-line test to determine
whether the given graph represents a function.

= 8

In Exercises 29–32, let f ( x ) = x 2 − 3 x + 1, g( x ) =
and h( x ) = 2 − x .
29. Find f ( 0 ), g ( 0 ), h ( 0 ), f ( a ), and f (−x ).

2
,
x

49.

y

(3, 2)

30. Find f (1), g (1), h (1), g ( a ), and g ( x 2 ).

1

31. Find f (−1), g (−1), h (−1), h ( c ), and h (−x ).

0

(1, 1)
1

x

32. Find f ( 4 ), g ( 4 ), h ( 4 ), g(2 + k ), and f ( a + k ).
33. Let f ( x ) =
a. f ( 0 )
c. f ( 2 )

2x
. Find each function value.
4 − x2
b. f (1)
d. f ( −2 )
50.

e. f (−x )
34. Let g ( x ) = 2 x +
a. g ( 0 )
c. g ( 2 )
e. g(−x )

y
(4, 4)

x 2 − 4. Find each function value.
b. g (1)
d. g (−3 )

(3, 2)

1
0

35. Find the sum of the area of the shaded rectangles in the
figure below.

(1, 1)

1

x

y
f (x) 5 x2 1 2

51.

0

1

2

52.

y

x

0
0

36. Find the sum of the area of the shaded rectangles in the
figure below.
y

53.

f (x) 5 x2 1 2

1

2

x

In Exercises 37–48, find the domain of each function.
37. f ( x ) = −8 x + 7
38. f ( x ) = 2 x 2 − 11
1
39. f ( x ) =
x−9

54.

y

x

2x
x2 − 1

42. h ( x ) =

x−3
x2 − 4

43. G ( x ) =

x−3
x+2

44. f ( x ) =

3
4−x

45. F ( x ) =

x+4
x 2 + 3x + 2

46. F ( x ) =

1− x
x 2 + 5x + 6

47. g ( x ) =

x2 + 1
x

48. g ( x ) =

1
x2 + 1

y

x

0

In Exercises 55–58, the graph of a function is given. Find the
indicated function values.
55. f ( −4 ), f ( −1 ), f ( 3 ), f ( 5 ) 56. g ( −2 ), g ( 1 ), g ( 3 ), g ( 4 )
y

y

1
40. f ( x ) =
x+9

41. h ( x ) =

x

x

0

0

y

(5, 7)

(4, 5)

(3, 5)

1
0

1

x

1

(3, 0)

0

1

x

Section 2.4 Functions
57. h ( −2 ), h ( −1 ), h ( 0 ), h ( 1 )

58. f ( −1 ), f ( 0 ), f ( 1 )

65.

y

y

y
(1, 4)
(0, 3)

1

1
0

1

(0, 0)

0

x

1

x

x

66.

y

59. Let h ( x ) = x 2 − x + 1. Find x such that ( x, 7 ) is on the
graph of h.
60. Let h ( x ) = x 2 + x + 8. Find x such that ( x, 7 ) is on the
graph of H.

x

61. Let f ( x ) = −2( x + 1) 2 + 7.
a. Is ( 1, 1 ) a point of the graph of f ?
b. Find all x such that ( x, 1 ) is on the graph of f .
c. Find the y-intercept of the graph of f .
d. Find all x-intercepts of the graph of f .
62. Let f ( x ) = −3 x 2 − 12 x.
a. Is ( −2, 10 ) a point of the graph of f ?
b. Find x such that ( x, 12 ) is on the graph of f .
c. Find the y-intercept of the graph of f .
d. Find all x-intercepts of the graph of f .

67.

y

x

In Exercises 63–70, find the domain and the range of each function from its graph. The axes are marked in one-unit intervals.
63.

y

68.

y

x

x

64.

y

69.

y

x

x

225

226
70.

Chapter 2 Graphs and Functions
79. Find the domain of g.

y

80. Find the range of g.
81. Find g ( −4 ), g ( 1 ), and g(3).
82. Find g (−5 ) − g ( 5 ) .
83. Solve g( x ) = −4.
x

Applying the Concepts
In Exercises 85–88, state whether the given relation is a function
and explain why.
85. To each day of the year there corresponds the high temperature in your hometown on that day.

For Exercises 71–78, refer to the graph of y = f ( x ) in the
figure. The axes are marked off in one-unit intervals.

86. To each year since 1950 there corresponds the cost of a
first-class postage stamp on January 1 of that year.

y

y

84. Solve g( x ) = 6.

87. To each letter of the word NUTS there corresponds the states
whose names start with that letter.
88. To each day of the week there corresponds the first names of
people currently living in the United States born on that day
of the week.

f(x)

89. Square tiles. The area A( x ) of a square tile is a function of
the length x of the square’s side. Write a function rule for the
area of a square tile. Find and interpret A( 4 ).

x

90. Cube. The volume V ( x ) of a cube is a function of the length
x of the cube’s edge. Write a function rule for the volume of
a cube. Evaluate the function for a cube with sides of length
3 inches.

71. Find the domain of f .
72. Find the range of f .
73. Find the x-intercepts of f .

91. Surface area. Is the total surface area S of a cube a function
of the edge length x of the cube? If it is not a function, explain
why not. If it is a function, write the function rule S ( x ) and
evaluate S ( 3 ).

74. Find the y-intercept of f .
75. Find f ( −7 ), f ( 1 ), and f ( 5 ).
76. Find f ( −4 ), f ( −1 ), and f ( 3 ).
77. Solve the equation f ( x ) = 3.

92. Measurement. One meter equals about 39.37 inches. Write
a function rule for converting inches to meters. Evaluate the
function for 59 inches.

78. Solve the equation f ( x ) = −2.
In Exercises 79–84, refer to the graph of y = g( x ) in the
figure. The axes are marked off in one-unit intervals.

93. Motion of a projectile. A stone thrown upward with an
initial velocity of 128 feet per second will attain a height of
h feet in t seconds, where

y

h ( t ) = 128t − 16t 2 , 0 ≤ t ≤ 8.
a. What is the domain of h?
b. Find h ( 2 ), h ( 4 ), and h ( 6 ).
c. How long will it take the stone to hit the ground?
d. Sketch a graph of y = h ( t ).

x

94. Drug concentration. The bioavailability (percent of an
administered drug dose that makes it into the bloodstream) of
a drug given by injection is 100%. Andrew is given a daily
injection of 0.5 mg of a drug. Half of the injected amount is
filtered out of the bloodstream every 12 hours. Find the
­concentration of the drug in the bloodstream after two days
(48 hours; 3 shots, 4 filters).
95. Drug concentration. A certain drug has been prescribed
to treat an infection. The patient receives an injection of
16 milliliters of the drug every four hours. During this same
four-hour period, the kidneys filter out one-fourth of the drug.
Find the concentration of the drug after 4 hours, 8 hours,
12 hours, 16 hours, and 20 hours. Sketch the graph of the concentration of the drug in the bloodstream as a function of time.
96. Numbers. The sum of two numbers x and y is 28. Write the
product P of these numbers as a function of x.

Section 2.4 Functions
97. Area of a rectangle. The dimensions of a rectangle are
x and y, and its perimeter is 60 meters. Write the area A of
the rectangle as a function of x.
98. Box volume. A closed box with a square base of side x
inches is to hold 64 in 3. Write the surface area S of the box
as a function of x.
99. Inscribed rectangle. In the figure, a rectangle is inscribed
in a semicircle of diameter 2r .
a. Write the perimeter P of the rectangle as a function of x.
b. Write the area A of the rectangle as a function of x.
y

y
(x, y)
d
f (x) 5 x3 2 3x 1 6 (2, 1)
0

x

100. Piece of wire. A piece of wire 20 inches long is to be cut
into two pieces. (See the figure.) The piece of length x is to
form a circle, and the other is to form a square. Write A, the
sum of the areas of the two figures, as a function of x.
20 2 x

x
20

101. Area of metal. An open cylindrical tank with circular
base of radius r is to be constructed of metal to contain a
volume of 64 in 3. Write the surface area A of the metal as a
function of r.

h

r

102. Cost of pool. A 288-ft 3 pool is to be built with a square
bottom of side length x. The sides are built with tiles and
the bottom with cement. The cost per unit of tiles is $6 / ft 2 ,
and cost of the bottom is $2 / ft 2 . Write the total cost C as a
function of x.
103. Distance between cars. Two cars are traveling along two
roads that cross each other at right angles at point A. Both cars
are traveling toward A for t seconds at 30 ft/sec. Initially,
their distances from A are 1500 ft and 2100 ft, respectively.
Write the distance d between the cars as a function of t.
y

2100
d

1500

A

x

104. Distance. Write the distance d from the point ( 2, 1 ) to
a point ( x, y ) on the graph of f ( x ) = x 3 − 3 x + 6 as a
function of x.

x

105. Time of travel. An island is at point A, 5 mi from the
nearest point B on a straight beach. A store is at point C,
8 mi up the beach from point B. Julio can row at 4 mi / hr
and walk 5 mi / hr. He rows to the point P, x mi up the
beach from point B and walks from P to C. Write the total
time T of travel from A to C as a function of x.
B

(x, y)

x2 1 y2 5 r2, y ù 0

227

x mi

P

(8 2 x) mi C

5 mi

A

106. Price–demand. Analysts for an electronics company
determined that the price–demand function for its 60-inch
LED televisions is
p( x ) = 1275 − 25 x, 1 ≤ x ≤ 30,
			where p is the wholesale price per TV in dollars and x, in
thousands, is the number of TVs that can be sold.
a. Find and interpret p( 5 ), p( 15 ), and p( 30 ).
b. Sketch the graph of y = p( x ).
c. Solve the equation p( x ) = 650 and interpret your result.
107. Revenue.
a. Using the price–demand function p( x ) = 1275 − 25 x,
1 ≤ x ≤ 30, of Exercise 106, write the company’s revenue function R ( x ) and state its domain.
b. Find and interpret R ( 1 ), R ( 5 ), R ( 10 ), R ( 15 ), R ( 20 ),
R ( 25 ), and R ( 30 ).
c. Using the data from part b, sketch the graph of y = R ( x ).
d. Solve the equation R ( x ) = 4700 and interpret your result.
108. Breaking even. Peerless Publishing Company intends to
publish Harriet Henrita’s next novel. The estimated cost is
$75,000 plus $5.50 for each copy printed. The selling price
per copy is $15. The bookstores retain 40% of the selling
price as commission. Let x represent the number of copies
printed and sold.
a. Find the cost function C ( x ).
b. Find the revenue function R ( x ).
c. Find the profit function P ( x ).
d. How many copies of the novel must be sold for Peerless
to break even?
e. What is the company profit if 46,000 copies are
sold?
109. Breaking even. Capital Records Company plans to
produce a CD by the popular rapper Rapit. The fixed cost
is $500,000, and the variable cost is $0.50 per CD. The
company sells each CD to record stores for $5. Let x represent the number of CDs produced and sold.
a. How many CDs must be sold for the company to break
even?
b. How many CDs must be sold for the company to make a
profit of $750,000?

228

Chapter 2 Graphs and Functions

Beyond the Basics

128. Consider the graph of the function

In Exercises 110–113, find an expression for f ( x ) by solving
for y and replacing y with f ( x ). Then find the domain of f
and compute f ( 4 ).
2
111. xy − 3 = 2 y
110. x =
y−4
112. ( x 2 + 1 ) y + x = 2

113. yx 2 −

x = −2 y

In Exercises 114–119, state whether f and g represent the
same function. Explain your reasons.
114. f ( x ) = 3 x − 4, domain 0 ≤ x ≤ 8, g( x ) = 3 x − 4
115. f ( x ) = 3 x 2 , g( x ) = 3 x 2 , domain − 5 ≤ x ≤ 5
116. f ( x ) = x − 1, g( x ) =
117. f ( x ) =

x2 − 1
x+1

x+2
1
, g( x ) =
x−3
x2 − x − 6

118. f ( x ) = x 2 + 1, g ( x ) = 8 x − 14, both with domain
{ 3, 5 }
119. f ( x ) = 2 x 2 + 8, g( x ) = 3 x + 7, both with domain {1, 2 }
120. Let f ( x ) = ax 2 + ax − 3. If f ( 2 ) = 15, find a.
121. Let g( x ) = x 2 + bx + b 2 . If g(6) = 28, find b.
3 x + 2a
122. Let h ( x ) =
. If h ( 6 ) = 0 and h ( 3 ) is undefined,
2x − b
find a and b.
123. Let f ( x ) = 2 x − 3. Find f ( x 2 ) and [ f ( x ) ]2 .

( )

1
1
= 0.
, show that g( x ) + g
x2
x
x −1
x −1
1
125. If f ( x ) =
= − .
, show that f
x+1
x+1
x
124. If g( x ) = x 2 −

(

126. If f ( x ) =

)

x+3
3 + 5x
and t =
, show that f ( t ) = x.
4x − 5
4x − 1

Critical Thinking / Discussion / Writing
127. Write an equation of a function with each domain. Answers
will vary.
a. [ 2, ∞ )
b. ( 2, ∞ )
c. ( −∞, 2 ]
d. ( −∞, 2 )

GETTING READY

f ( x ) = ax 2 + bx + c, a ≠ 0.
a. Write an equation whose solution yields the
x-intercepts.
b. Write an equation whose solution is the y-intercept.
c. Write (if possible) a condition under which the graph of
y = f ( x ) has no x-intercepts.
d. Write (if possible) a condition under which the graph of
y = f ( x ) has no y-intercepts.
129. Give an example (if possible) of a function matching each
description. Some have many different correct answers.
a. Its graph is symmetric with respect to the y-axis.
b. Its graph is symmetric with respect to the x-axis.
c. Its graph is symmetric with respect to the origin.
d. Its graph consists of a single point.
e. Its graph is a horizontal line.
f. Its graph is a vertical line.
130. Let X = { a, b } and Y = {1, 2, 3 }.
a. How many functions are there from X to Y?
b. How many functions are there from Y to X?
131. If a set X has m elements and a set Y has n elements, how
many functions can be defined from X to Y? Justify.

Active Learning
132. Explorations: Identifying the Domain and
Range of a Function From Its Graph. Open
the GeoGebra applet using the attached QR code
or bitly link.
a. Select one of the five functions by checking the associated box. Then check the box “Domain” and drag the
point P to see the dashed line identify the domain of the
selected function on the x-axis.
b. Next check the box “Range” and drag the point P to see
the blue line identify the range of the selected function on
the y-axis. Be sure to then change the selected function
and explore the domain and range of each function.

for the Next Section

REVIEW CONCEPTS
Inequalities (Section P.1, pages 6–7)
Evaluating a function (Section 2.4, page 214)
REVIEW SKILLS

Evaluate function values (Section 2.4, page 214)
In Exercises GR5–GR10, let f ( x ) = 3 − 2 x 2 , g( x ) =

2
and h( x ) = 2
.
x +1

GR5. Find f ( 0 ), g ( 0 ), and h ( 0 ).

Solving Inequalities (Section 1.6, page 143)
In Exercises GR1–GR4, solve each inequality.
GR1. 2 x − 4 < 12

GR6. Find f (1), g (1), and h (1).

GR2. 5 x + 9 ≤ 7( x + 1 )

GR9. Find f (−x ), g(−x ), and h (−x ).

GR3. x 2 > 0

GR10. Find − f ( x ), − g( x ), and − h ( x ).

GR4. ( 3 − x )( x + 5 ) ≥ 0

					

GR7. Find f (−2 ), g (−2 ), and h (−2 ).
GR8. Find f ( x + 1), g ( x + 1), and h ( x + 1).

x + 3,

Section 2.5 Properties of Functions

2.5

229

Properties of Functions
Objectives

Videos for
this Section

1

Determine whether a function is increasing or decreasing on an interval.

2

Use a graph to locate relative maximum and minimum values.

3

Identify even and odd functions.

4

Find the average rate of change of a function.

Algebra in Coughing
Coughing is the body’s way of removing
foreign material or mucus from the lungs
and upper airway passages or reacting to
an irritated airway. When you cough, the
windpipe contracts to increase the velocity
of the outgoing air.
The average flow velocity, v, can be
modeled by the equation
v = c ( r0 − r )r 2 mm/sec,
where r0 is the rest radius of the windpipe in
millimeters, r is its contracted radius, and c
is a positive constant. In Example 4, we find
the value of r that maximizes the velocity of
the air going out. The diameter of the windpipe of a typical adult male varies between
25 mm and 27 mm, while that of a typical
adult female varies between 21 mm and
23 mm.

Objective 1

Increasing and Decreasing Functions
In most applications, functions describe the relation between two quantities with variables
representing their respective numerical values, with one quantity (the dependent variable)
being directly determined by the other (the independent variable). As part of the study of
such functions, we explore how the output values of the given function change with respect
to the input values. When input values are increasing, the output values of the function may
increase, decrease, or remain constant. We are also interested in the largest and smallest
output values of the function within a given range of input values (relative maximum or
minimum). We will formulate these concepts algebraically, but we first look at a graph to
help us visualize them. Figure 2.57 represents the function that models regular weekday
ridership numbers in the New York City Metro Subway as a function of time.
We can see from the graph that the number of passengers is at an all-time low of 10,000
at about 2 a.m. and that the number of passengers increases during the morning commute
period, peaking at 564,000 at about 8 a.m. After the morning rush hour peak, the number
of passengers decreases, reaching a mid-day low of 210,000 at about 11 a.m., and increases
again to reach the afternoon rush hour period peak of 544,000 at about 5 p.m. Finally, the
number of passengers decreases from 5 p.m. to 12 a.m.

230

Chapter 2 Graphs and Functions
600,000

564,000

544,000

500,000

Number of riders

400,000

300,000

200,000

210,000

100,000
10,000
0

1

Figure 2.57

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24

Weekday ridership numbers in New York Metro Subway as a function of time

Increasing, Decreasing, and Constant Functions
Let f be a function and let x 1 and x 2 be any two numbers in an open interval ( a, b )
contained in the domain of f . See Figure 2.58. The symbols a and b may represent
real numbers, −∞, or ∞. Then
(i) f is called an increasing function on ( a, b ) if x 1 < x 2 implies f ( x 1 ) < f ( x 2 ).
(ii) f is called a decreasing function on ( a, b ) if x 1 < x 2 implies f ( x 1 ) > f ( x 2 ).
(iii) f is constant on ( a, b ) if x 1 < x 2 implies f ( x 1 ) = f ( x 2 ).

y

y

f(x1)
x1

a

Height of ball (in feet)

h

12

x2

b

Increasing function on (a, b)
(a)

(3, h(3))

Figure 2.58

16

f(x1)

f(x2)
x

a

y

f(x1)

f(x2)
x1

x2

b

Decreasing function on (a, b)
(b)

x

a

x1

f(x2)
x2

b

x

Constant function on (a, b)
(c)

Increasing, decreasing, and constant functions

y 5 h(t)

8
4
0
t
2 3 4
6
Time in air (in seconds)

Figure 2.59 The function
h ( t ) increases on ( 0, 3 ) and
decreases on ( 3, 6 ).

Geometrically, the graph of an increasing function on an open interval ( a, b ) rises as
x-values increase on ( a, b ). This is because, by definition, as x-values increase from x 1 to
x 2 , the y-values also increase, from f ( x 1 ) to f ( x 2 ). Similarly, the graph of a decreasing
function on ( a, b ) falls as x-values increase. The graph of a constant function is horizontal,
or flat, over the interval ( a, b ).
Functions can increase, decrease, or remain constant on different intervals within their
domains. The function that assigns the height of a ball tossed in the air to the length of time
it is in the air is an example of a function that increases, but also decreases, over different
intervals of its domain. See Figure 2.59.

Section 2.5 Properties of Functions

EXAMPLE 1

231

Tracking the Behavior of a Function

From the graph of the function f in Figure 2.57, find the intervals over which f is increasing, is decreasing, or is constant.
Solution
The function f is increasing on the open intervals ( 2, 8 ) and ( 11, 17 ). The function f is
decreasing on the open intervals ( 0, 2 ), ( 8, 11 ), and ( 17, 24 ).
SIDE NOTE
When specifying the intervals
over which a function f is
increasing, decreasing, or
constant, you need to use the
intervals in the domain of f, not
in the range of f.

Practice Problem 1. Using the graph of g in Figure 2.60, find the intervals over which g
is increasing, is decreasing, or is constant.
4070

4000
3640
3500
3490

Number of riders

3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
40
0

1

Figure 2.60

Objective 2

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24

Weekend bus ridership numbers in St. Louis as a function of time

Relative Maximum and Minimum Values
If a function f has a value at a point a that is greater than or equal (less than or equal) to
the values of f at all nearby points on both sides of a, that value is called a relative maximum (relative minimum). To locate the relative maxima and minima of a function on an
open interval, we need to determine where the graph attains its highest and lowest points,
respectively.
Relative Maximum and Relative Minimum
If a is in the domain of a function f , we say that the value f ( a ) is a relative
maximum of f if there is an interval ( x 1, x 2 ) containing a such that
f ( a ) ≥ f ( x ) for every x in the interval ( x 1, x 2 ).
We say that the value f ( a ) is a relative minimum of f if there is an interval ( x 1 , x 2 )
containing a such that
f ( a ) ≤ f ( x ) for every x in the interval ( x 1, x 2 ).

The value f ( a ) is called an extreme value of f if it is either a relative maximum value
or a relative minimum value.

Chapter 2 Graphs and Functions

The graph of a function can help you find or approximate maximum or minimum
values (if any) of the function. For example, the graph of a function f in Figure 2.61
shows that
•

f has two relative maxima:
(i) at x = 1 with relative maximum value f ( 1 ) = 3.
(ii) at x = 4 with relative maximum value f ( 4 ) = 7.

•

f has two relative minima:
(i) at x = 2 with relative minimum value f ( 2 ) = 1.
(ii) at x = 6 with relative minimum value f ( 6 ) = −2.

(1, 3)
(2, 1)
2

3

4

5

x

6

(6, 22)

Figure 2.61 Relative maximum
and minimum values

Points on a graph where a function changes direction from increasing to decreasing
or from decreasing to increasing are called turning points. See Figure 2.62. Turning
points help us find relative maxima or minima.
y

y

Dec
re a

(a, f(a))

g

a

Figure 2.62

f(a)

g
asin
cre
De

f(a)

si n

Turning Point
(a, f(a))

Inc
rea
sin
g

Points whose y-coordinates are
relative minimum values

g

1

a si n

(4, 7)

y

cre

Points whose y-coordinates are
relative maximum values

In

232

Turning Point

x

a

x

Turning points of a function

In Figure 2.61, each of the points ( 1, 3 ), ( 2, 1 ), ( 4, 7 ), and ( 6, − 2 ) is a turning point.

EXAMPLE 2

Finding Relative Maxima and Minima

Use the graph of the function f in Figure 2.57 on page 230 to find the relative maxima and
minima of f.
Solution
The function f has a relative maximum of 564,000 at 8 and of 544,000 at 17. The function
f has a relative minimum of 10,000 at 2 and of 210,000 at 11.
Practice Problem 2. Use the graph of the function g in Figure 2.60 to find the relative
maxima and minima of g.
A graph is a powerful visual method of tracking the behavior of a function, including finding its maxima and minima. In calculus you will learn the general technique for finding the
maxima and minima of functions based on just their equation. For the present, however, we
will settle for an approximation of these points by using a graphing utility.

EXAMPLE 3

Approximating Relative Extrema

Use a graphing utility to approximate the relative maximum and the relative minimum
points on the graph of the function f ( x ) = x 3 − x 2 .

Section 2.5 Properties of Functions

233

Solution
The graph of f is shown in Figure 2.63. By using the TRACE and ZOOM features of a
graphing utility, we see that the function f has the following:
Relative minimum is estimated to be −0.15 at 0.67.
Relative maximum is estimated to be 0 at 0.
Practice Problem 3. Repeat Example 3 for g( x ) = −2 x 3 + 3 x 2.
Figure 2.63

EXAMPLE 4

Algebra in Coughing

The average flow velocity, v , of outgoing air through the windpipe is modeled by (see
introduction to this section)
v = c ( r0 − r ) r 2 mm / sec

where r0 is the rest radius of the windpipe, r is its contracted radius, and c is a positive
constant. For Mr. Osborn, assume that c = 1 and r0 = 13 mm. Use a graphing utility to
estimate the value of r that will maximize the airflow v when Mr. Osborn coughs.

400
(8.67, 325)

13

0

Figure 2.64

r0
≤ r ≤ r0 ,
2

Flow velocity

Objective 3

Solution
The graph of v for 0 ≤ r ≤ 13 is shown in Figure 2.64. By using the TRACE and ZOOM
features, we see that the maximum point on the graph is estimated at ( 8.67, 325 ). So
Mr. Osborn’s windpipe contracts to a radius of 8.67 mm to maximize the airflow velocity.
Practice Problem 4. Repeat Example 4 for Mrs. Osborn. Again, let c = 1 but
r0 = 11.

Even–Odd Functions and Symmetry
This topic, even–odd functions, uses ideas of symmetry discussed in Section 2.2.
Even Function
A function f is called an even function if, for each x in the domain of f , − x is also
in the domain of f and
f ( −x ) = f ( x ) .
The graph of an even function is symmetric about the y-axis.

EXAMPLE 5

Graphing the Squaring Function

Show that the squaring function f ( x ) = x 2 is an even function and sketch its graph.
Solution
The function f ( x ) = x 2 is even because
f ( −x ) = ( −x ) 2
= x2
= f ( x ).

Replace x with − x.
( −x ) 2

= x2
Replace x 2 with f ( x ).

To sketch the graph of f ( x ) = x 2 , we make a table of values. See Table 2.9(a). We then
plot the points that are in the first quadrant and join them with a smooth curve. Next, we
use y-axis symmetry to find additional points on the graph of f in the second quadrant,
which are listed in Table 2.9(b). See Figure 2.65. Note that the scales on the x- and y-axes
are different.

234

Chapter 2 Graphs and Functions
y
10

TABLE 2.9(a)

x

1
2
1
0
4
0

f ( x) = x 2

3
2
9
1
4
1

2
4

5
2
25
4

(3, 9)

( 3, 9)

3
9

(x, f(x))

1
0

Figure 2.65

TABLE 2.9(b)
SIDE NOTE
The graph of a nonzero
function cannot be symmetric
with respect to the x-axis
because the two ordered pairs
( x, y ) and ( x, − y ) would then
be points of the graph that are
on the same vertical line.

x

0

f ( x) = x 2

0

1

2

3

x

Graph of f ( x ) = x 2

1
3
−1 −
−2
2
2
1
9
1
4
4
4

−

5
2
25
4

−

−3
9

Practice Problem 5. Show that the function f ( x ) = −x 2 is an even function and sketch
its graph.
Odd Function
A function f is an odd function if for each x in the domain of f , − x is also in the
domain of f and
f ( −x ) = − f ( x ) .
The graph of an odd function is symmetric about the origin.

EXAMPLE 6

Graphing the Cubing Function

Show that the cubing function defined by g( x ) = x 3 is an odd function and sketch its graph.
Solution
The function g( x ) = x 3 is an odd function because
g ( −x ) = ( −x ) 3
= −x 3
= −g ( x ).

Replace x with − x.
( −x ) 3

= −x 3
Replace x 3 with g ( x ).

To sketch the graph of g( x ) = x 3 , we plot points in the first quadrant and then use symmetry
about the origin to extend the graph to the third quadrant. The graph is shown in Figure 2.66.
y

(x, g(x))
0

Figure 2.66

x

x

Graph of g ( x ) = x 3

Practice Problem 6. Show that the function f ( x ) = −x 3 is an odd function and sketch
its graph.

Section 2.5 Properties of Functions

The function h ( x ) = 2 x + 3, whose graph is sketched in Figure 2.67, is neither even nor
odd, and its graph is neither symmetric with respect to the y-axis nor symmetric with
respect to the origin. To see this algebraically, notice that h ( −x ) = 2( −x ) + 3 = − 2 x + 3,
which is not equivalent to h ( x ) or −h ( x ) (because −h ( x ) = −2 x − 3).

y
8

2
1
5
2

10
2

235

EXAMPLE 7
1
2

5 x
2

Figure 2.67 Graph of
h( x ) = 2x + 3

Testing for Evenness and Oddness

Determine whether each function is even, odd, or neither.
a. g( x ) = x 3 − 4 x
b. f ( x ) = x 2 + 5

c. h ( x ) = 2 x 3 + x 2

Solution
a. g( x ) is an odd function because
g ( −x ) = ( −x ) 3 − 4 ( −x )
Replace x with − x.
= −x 3 + 4 x
= −( x 3 − 4 x )
= −g ( x ).

Simplify.
Distributive property

b. f ( x ) is an even function because
Replace x with − x.
f ( −x ) = ( −x ) 2 + 5
= x2 + 5
= f ( x ).
c.

Simplify.

h ( −x ) = 2 ( −x ) 3 + ( −x ) 2
= −2 x 3 + x 2

Replace x with − x.
Simplify.

Comparing h ( x ) = 2 x 3 + x 2, h ( −x ) = −2 x 3 + x 2, and −h ( x ) = −2 x 3 − x 2 , we
note that h ( −x ) ≠ h ( x ) and h ( −x ) ≠ −h ( x ). Hence, h ( x ) is neither even nor odd.
Practice Problem 7. Repeat Example 7 for each function.
a. g( x ) = 3 x 4 − 5 x 2   b. f ( x ) = 4 x 5 + 2 x 3    c. h ( x ) = 2 x + 1

Objective 4

Average Rate of Change
Suppose your salary increases from $25, 000 a year to $40, 000 a year over a five-year
period. You then have the following:
Change in salary: $40, 000 − $25, 000 = $15, 000
Average rate of change in salary:
$40, 000 − $25, 000
$15, 000
=
= $3000 per year
5
5
Regardless of when you actually received the raises during the five-year period, the final
salary is the same as if you received your average annual increase of $3000 each year.
The average rate of change can be defined in a more general setting.
Average Rate of Change of a Function
Let ( a, f ( a ) ) and ( b, f ( b ) ) be two points on the graph of a function f . Then the
average rate of change of f ( x ) as x changes from a to b is defined by
f (b) − f (a)
∆y
, a ≠ b.
=
b−a
∆x
Because the slope of a line is the ratio of the vertical change in y to the horizontal change
∆y
in x,
, the slope of a line gives the average rate of change in y per unit change in x.
∆x

236

Chapter 2 Graphs and Functions

Geometrically, the average rate of change of f from x = a to x = b is the slope of the
secant line joining the points P ( a, f ( a ) ) and Q ( b, f ( b ) ) on the graph of f. See Figure 2.68.
y

y 5 f (x)
Q(b, f (b))

ant

Sec

line

f (b)

Q

P(a, f (a))

Dy 5 f (b) 2 f (a)
f (a)

P
Dx 5 b 2 a
a

Figure 2.68

x

b

Secant line and average rate of change

PROCEDURE IN ACTION
EXAMPLE 8

Finding the Average Rate of Change

Objective

Example

Find the average rate of change of a function f as x changes
from a to b.

Find the average rate of change of f ( x ) = 2 − 3 x 2 as x
changes from x = 1 to x = 3.

Step 1

1. f ( 1 ) = 2 − 3( 1 ) 2 = −1

Find f ( a ) and f ( b ) .

2

f ( 3 ) = 2 − 3( 3 ) = −25

a=1
b=3

2. f ( b ) − f ( a ) = −25 − ( −1 ) = − 24
b−a
3−1
2
= −12

Step 2 Use the values from Step 1 in the definition
of average rate of change.

Practice Problem 8. Find the average rate of change of f ( x ) = 1 − x 2 as x changes
from 2 to 4.

EXAMPLE 9

Finding the Average Rate of Change

Find the average rate of change of f ( t ) = 2t 2 − 3 as t changes from t = 5 to
t = x, x ≠ 5.
Solution
f (b) − f (a)
b−a
f ( x ) − f ( 5)
=
x−5
( 2x 2 − 3 ) − ( 2 ⋅ 5 2 − 3 )
=
x−5
2
2x − 3 − 2 ⋅ 5 2 + 3
=
x−5
2
(
2 x − 52 )
=
x−5
2( x + 5 )( x − 5 )
=
x−5
= 2 x + 10

Average rate of change =

Definition
b = x, a = 5
Substitute for f ( x ) and f ( 5 ).

Simplify.
Difference of squares
Simplify: x − 5 ≠ 0.

Practice Problem 9. Find the average rate of change of f ( t ) = 1 − t as t changes from
t = 2 to t = x, x ≠ 2.

Section 2.5 Properties of Functions

EXAMPLE 10

237

Average Decrease in Sound Level

2500
, where
x2
f ( x ) is the loudness in decibels (dB) and x is your distance (in feet) from the TV. Find the
average rate of change in loudness as you move from 5 feet away from the TV to 10 feet
away from the TV.
The loudness of music coming from a TV is given by the function f ( x ) =

Solution
We want to determine the average rate of change in f from x = 5 to x = 10. We first
compute f ( b ) − f ( a ), where a = 5 and b = 10. Then,
f ( b ) − f ( a ) = f ( 10 ) − f ( 5 ) =
and,

2500
2500
−
= 25 − 100 = − 75,
10 2
52

Replace a with
5 and b with 10.

f (b) − f (a)
f ( 10 ) − f ( 5 )
−75
=
=
= −15.
b−a
10 − 5
5

The average rate of change is −15, so the average decrease in loudness is 15 dB for each
additional foot you move away from the TV.
Practice Problem 10. The number of bacteria per cubic centimeter in a swimming pool x days after adding chlorine to the pool is given by the function
f ( x ) = 100 x 2 − 800 x + 2000. Find the average rate of change in the number of
bacteria per cubic centimeter in the pool from the day the chlorine is added to three
days later. [Hint: The chlorine is added on day 0.]
The average rate of change calculated in Example 9 is a difference quotient at 5. The
difference quotient is an important concept in calculus.

Difference Quotient
For a function f , the difference quotient is
f ( x + h) − f ( x)
, h ≠ 0.
h
Equivalently, the difference quotient can be written in the form

EXAMPLE 11

f ( x) − f (a)
, x ≠ a.
x−a

Evaluating and Simplifying a Difference Quotient

Let f ( x ) = 2 x 2 − 3 x + 5. Find and simplify

f ( x + h) − f ( x)
, h ≠ 0.
h

Solution
First, we find f ( x + h ).
f ( x ) = 2 x 2 − 3x + 5
2

f ( x + h ) = 2 ( x + h ) − 3( x + h ) + 5
= 2( x 2 + 2 xh + h 2 ) − 3( x + h ) + 5
= 2 x 2 + 4 xh + 2h 2 − 3 x − 3h + 5

Original equation
Replace x with ( x + h ).
( x + h ) 2 = x 2 + 2 xh + h 2

Use the distributive property.

238

Chapter 2 Graphs and Functions

Then we substitute into the difference quotient.
f( x + h)

 f x
f ( x + h) − f ( x)
( 2 x 2 + 4 xh + 2h 2 − 3 x − 3h + 5 ) − ( 2 x 2 − 3 x + 5 )
=
h
h
2 x 2 + 4 xh + 2h 2 − 3 x − 3h + 5 − 2 x 2 + 3 x − 5
Subtract.
=
h
4 xh − 3h + 2h 2
=
Simplify.
h
h ( 4 x − 3 + 2h )
=
Factor out h.
h
= 4 x − 3 + 2h
Divide out the common factor h.
(

)

Practice Problem 11. Repeat Example 11 for f ( x ) = −x 2 + x − 3.

2.5

Exercises

Videos for
select exercises

Concepts and Vocabulary
11.

1. A function f is decreasing if x1 < x 2 implies that
f ( x1 )
f ( x 2 ).

12.

y
(2, 10)

2. f ( a ) is a relative maximum of f if there is an interval
( x 1 , x 2 ) containing a such that
for every x
in the interval ( x1 , x 2 ).
3. A function f is even if

(3, 2)

.

x

4. The average rate of change of f as x changes from x = a to
x = b is
, a ≠ b.
5. True or False. The average rate of change of f as x changes
from a to b is the slope of the line through the points
( a, f ( a ) ) and ( b, f ( b ) ).

13.

14.

y

4
( 2, 2)

7. True or False. Functions can increase, decrease, or remain
constant on different intervals of their domains.

4

2

8. True or False. The graph of an odd function is symmetric
with respect to the y-axis.

4

2
0

( 1, 3)

(2, 2)
2

4

x

2

2

15.

Building Skills
In Exercises 9–16, the graph of a function is given. For each
function, determine the intervals over which the function is
increasing, decreasing, or constant.
9.
10.

6
( 3, 4)

2
(

x

1
,
2

0

2

4

6

x

1

3

x

(2,

3)

y
3

(2, 5)

(1, 2)

( 1, 1)
1

4

0

2

16.

2
4

(4, 3)

2

y

y

x

x

y

6. True or False. A relative maximum or a relative minimum point
on a graph is a turning point on the graph of a function.

y

y

1 0
1

3
2

4

2
2)

x
( 3,

2)

3

In Exercises 17–24, locate relative maximum and relative
minimum points on the graph. State whether each relative
extremum point is a turning point.
17. The graph of Exercise 9
18. The graph of Exercise 10

Section 2.5 Properties of Functions
19. The graph of Exercise 11

33.

20. The graph of Exercise 12

y

21. The graph of Exercise 13

1
(0, 1)

22. The graph of Exercise 14

34.

y
2

(1, 1)

1
(0, 0)

23. The graph of Exercise 15
24. The graph of Exercise 16

O

1

In Exercises 25–34, the graph of a function is given. State
whether the function is odd, even, or neither.
25.
26.
y

( 1,

1)

1

1
(0,

239

x

( 2,

2

1)

(2, 1)
1

1

( 1,

1)

(1, 1)

2

x

1
1)
2

y

In Exercises 35–48, determine algebraically whether the given
function is odd, even, or neither.
35. f ( x ) = 2 x 4 + 4
36. g( x ) = 3 x 4 − 5
x

27.

x

28.

y

y

x

x

29.

30.

y

( 1, 0)

38. g( x ) = 2 x 3 + 4 x

39. f ( x ) = 2 x + 4

40. g( x ) = 3 x + 7

1
41. f ( x ) = 2
x +4

42. g( x ) =

x2 + 2
x4 + 1

43. f ( x ) =

x3
x2 + 1

44. g( x ) =

x4 + 3
2 x 3 − 3x

45. f ( x ) =

x
x 5 − 3x 3

46. g( x ) =

x 3 + 2x
2 x 5 − 3x

47. f ( x ) =

x 2 − 2x
5x 4 + 7

48. g( x ) =

3x 2 + 7
x−3

In Exercises 49–56, the graph of a function is given; each grid
line represents 1 unit. Use the graph to find each of the following.
a. The domain and the range of the function
b. The intercepts, if any
c. The intervals on which the function is increasing, decreasing,
or constant
d. The relative extrema points, if any
e. Whether the function is odd, even, or neither
y
49.

(2, 0)

(1, 0)
x

31.

y

37. f ( x ) = 5 x 3 − 3 x

32.

y

x

( 2, 0)

y

x

50.

y

(0, 2)
( 1, 0)
(1, 0)

( 3, 0)

(3, 0)
x

( 2,

1)

(2,

1)

( 1, 0)

(1, 0)
(0, 0)

x
x

240

Chapter 2 Graphs and Functions
y

51.

y

56.

3
( 1.5, 0)

4

2

x

1

(1.5, 0)

0

2

5 x

2

6

52.

y

In Exercises 57–68, find the average rate of change of the
function as x changes from a to b.
57. f ( x ) = −2 x + 7; a = −1, b = 3

x

53.

y

x

58. f ( x ) = 4 x − 9; a = −2, b = 2
59. f ( x ) = 3 x + c; a = 1, b = 5
60. f ( x ) = mx + c; a = −1, b = 7
61. h ( x ) = x 2 − 1; a = −2, b = 0
62. h ( x ) = 2 − x 2 ; a = 3, b = 4
63. f ( x ) = (3 − x ) 2 ; a = 1, b = 3
64. f ( x ) = ( x − 2) 2 ; a = −1, b = 5
65. g( x ) = x 3 ; a = −1, b = 3
66. g( x ) = −x 3 ; a = −1, b = 3
1
67. h ( x ) = ; a = 2, b = 6
x
4
68. h ( x ) =
; a = −2, b = 4
x+3
In Exercises 69–82, find and simplify the difference quotient
f ( x + h) − f ( x )
, h ≠ 0.
of the form
h
69. f ( x ) = x
70. f ( x ) = 3 x + 2

y
7

(0, 3)
(3, 0)
1

8 x

Applying the Concepts

0.7
0.67
0.6
0.51
0.5

31

0.42

0.38

ar

0.4

M

5 x

1

3

0.76

M
a
M r9
ar
13
M
ar
20

1

0.8

ar

(0, 1)

0.9

23

5

80. f ( x ) = −3
1
82. f ( x ) = −
x

M

3

79. f ( x ) = 4
1
81. f ( x ) =
x

b

1 0

78. f ( x ) = 3 x 2 − 2 x + 5

16

3

77. f ( x ) = 2 x 2 + 3 x

Fe

5

76. f ( x ) = x 2 − x

b

3
1

75. f ( x ) = x 2

83. The graph of the function f that models the number of
COVID-19 vaccine doses administered (per 100 people) in the
United States between February 1, 2021 and March 31, 2021
is given below.

y
5

55.

74. f ( x ) = −2ax + c

Fe

0

72. f ( x ) = −5 x − 6

73. f ( x ) = mx + b

Fe
b
Fe 1
b
5

1

71. f ( x ) = −2 x + 3

Doses Administered (per 100 people)

54.

Section 2.5 Properties of Functions
87. Find the domain of v = f ( t ). Interpret.

a. Determine the open intervals on which the function is
increasing or decreasing.
b. Find all relative maxima and minima.

88. Find the range of v = f ( t ). Interpret.

84. The graph of the function f that models monthly averages of
rainfall (in mm) in Tokyo (Japan) observed over the period of
one year is given below.
180

185

185

89. Find the intervals over which the graph is above the t-axis.
Interpret.
90. Find the intervals over which the graph is below the t-axis.
Interpret.
91. Find the intervals over which v = f ( t ) is increasing.
Interpret for v > 0 and for v < 0.

160
140
120

241

92. Find the intervals over which v = f ( t ) is decreasing.
Interpret for v > 0 and for v < 0.

132

100

93. When does the particle have maximum speed?

80

94. When does the particle have minimum speed?

60

95. Describe the motion of the particle between t = 5 and
t = 6.

40
20
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec

a. Determine the open intervals on which the function is
increasing or decreasing.
b. Find all relative maxima and minima.
85. Flow rate. A nozzle with a radius of 0.5 inch is attached to a
hose with a radius of 1 inch. Because water is incompressible, the
flow rate, Q, (volume flowing past a cross section in time t)
through both hose and nozzle is the same, here 5 gallons per
minute. One gallon equals approximately 0.134 cubic feet. Use the
equation Q = Av to calculate the speed v of the water (in ft/min)
in the hose where A is the area of a cross section of the hose.

96. Describe the motion of the particle between t = 16 and
t = 19.
97. Maximizing volume. An open cardboard box is to be made
from a piece of 12-inch square cardboard by cutting equal
squares from the four corners and turning up the sides. Let x
be the length of the side of the square to be cut out.
a. Show that the volume, V, of the box is given by
V = 4 x 3 − 48 x 2 + 144 x.
b. Find the domain of V.
c. Use a graphing utility to graph the volume function and
determine the range of V from its graph.
d. Find the value of x for which V has a maximum
value.
98. Minimizing the sum. Find two positive numbers whose
product is 32 and whose sum is as small as possible.
a. Let one of the numbers be x; show that the sum
32
S = x+
.
x
b. Use a graphing utility to graph the sum function and
estimate the value of x for which S has a minimum
value.

86. Flow rate. Use the description given in the previous exercise to
calculate the speed of the water (in ft/min) in the nozzle where
A is the area of a cross section of the nozzle.
Motion from a graph. For Exercises 87–96, use the accompanying velocity vs. time graph of a particle moving on a coordinate
line with velocity v = f ( t ) in ft/sec at time t seconds. The axes
are marked off at 1-unit intervals. Use these terms to describe the
motion moving forward/backward, increasing/decreasing speed,
and resting. Recall that speed = velocity .
y

t

99. Cost. A computer notebook manufacturer has a daily fixed
cost of $10, 500 and a marginal cost of $210 per notebook.
a. Find the daily cost C ( x ) of manufacturing x notebooks
per day.
b. Find the cost of producing 50 notebooks per day.
c. Find the average cost of a computer notebook, assuming
that 50 notebooks are manufactured each day.
d. How many notebooks should be manufactured each day
so that the average cost per notebook is $315?
100. Geometry. Find an equation of the secant line to the graph
of f ( x ) = −2 x 2 + 3 x + 4 passing through the points on
the graph with x-coordinates 1 and 3.
101. Female postbaccalaureate students. The number of
full-time female postbaccalaureate students enrolled in
the fall in degree-granting postsecondary institutions in
2015 was 935,133. In 2019, that number had increased to
992,000. Assuming a linear increase in this student population, find the average rate of increase in the number of these
students per year from 2015 to 2019.

242

Chapter 2 Graphs and Functions

102. Average drain rate. Beginning one minute after draining
a storage tank starts, the amount of water in the tank is
60
− 5 gallons. Find the average rate of
given by f ( t ) =
t
decrease in the number of gallons in the tank between one
and five minutes.
103. Average velocity. A particle is moving in a straight line so
that its position at time t in seconds is f ( t ) = t 2 + 3t + 4
feet to the right of a reference point for t ≥ 0.
a. Find and interpret f ( 0 ).
b. Find the distance traveled by the particle in the first four
seconds.
c. Find the average velocity of the particle during the first
three seconds.
d. Find its average velocity between the second and fifth
seconds.
104. Population. The population of Sardonia (in millions)
t years after 2015 is given by P ( t ) = 0.02t 2 + 0.2t + 50.
a. Find and interpret (i) P ( 0 ), (ii) P ( 5 ).
b. What was the average rate of growth of Sardonia’s
population between 2015 and 2020?

Beyond the Basics
105. let f ( x ) =

3f (x) + 1
x −1
. Show that f ( 2 x ) =
.
f (x) + 3
x+1

106. What function is both odd and even?
107. Find algebraically the relative maximum point on the graph
of f ( x ) = −( x + 1) 2 + 5. Does its graph have a relative
minimum point?
108. Give an example to illustrate that a relative maximum point
on a graph need not be a turning point on the graph.
In Exercises 109–112, find the difference quotient
f ( x + h) − f ( x )
, h ≠ 0. Simplify with a rational numerator.
h
109. f ( x ) =

x

GETTING READY

110. f ( x ) =

x −1

111. f ( x ) = − 1
x
112. f ( x ) =

1
x2

Critical Thinking / Discussion/ Writing
Let f be a function with domain [ a, b ] so that a and b are
endpoints of this domain.
113. Define relative maximum (minimum) at a.
114. Define relative maximum (minimum) at b.
115. Give an example (if possible) of a function f matching each
description.
a. f has endpoint maximum and endpoint minimum.
b. f has endpoint minimum but no endpoint maximum.
c. f has endpoint maximum but no endpoint minimum.
d. f has neither endpoint maximum nor endpoint minimum.

Active Learning
116. Explorations: Finding intervals on which
a Function Increases, Decreases, or Is
Constant. Open the GeoGebra applet using the
attached QR code or bitly link.
a. Check one of the four boxes and drag the point P from
left to right to see a dashed maroon line appear on the
section of the graph where the selected function is
decreasing, a dot-dashed blue line appear on the section
of the graph where the selected function is increasing,
and a solid green line appear on the section of the graph
where the selected function is constant.
b. Next select one of the four functions by checking the
associated box. Then check the box “Decreasing” to see
the interval or intervals on which the selected function is
decreasing; check the box “Increasing” to see the interval
or intervals on which the selected function is increasing;
and check the box “Constant” to see the interval or intervals on which the selected function is constant.

for the Next Section

REVIEW CONCEPTS
Line equations (Section 2.3)

Sketch the graph of a function (Section 2.4, page 216)
GR4. Sketch the graph of y = −2 x + 3.

Absolute value (Section P.1, pages 9–10)

GR5. Sketch the graph of 2 x + 5 y − 10 = 0 .

Graph of an equation (Section 2.2, page 180)

Evaluate absolute value (Section P.1, page 10)
GR6. If x = −3, then x + 1 =
.

Rational exponents (Section P.6, page 68)
REVIEW SKILLS
Find the slope-intercept equation of a line
(Section 2.3, page 193)
In Exercises GR1–GR3, find the slope–intercept form of the
equation of the line that passes through the given points
P and Q.
GR1. P = ( −1, 3 ) and Q = ( 4, − 2 )
GR2. P = ( 6, 2 ) and Q = ( 7, −1 )
GR3. P = ( 3, − 5 ) and Q = ( 6, −3 )

GR7. Find x so that 2 x − 8 = 0.
Evaluate expressions involving rational exponents
(Section P.6, page 68)
GR8. Let f ( x ) = x 3/ 2 . Find (i) f ( 2 ), (ii) f ( 4 ), and
(iii) f ( −4 ).
GR9. Let f ( x ) = x 2 / 3 . Find (i) f ( 2 ), (ii) f ( 8 ), and
(iii) f ( −8 ).

Section 2.6 A Library of Functions

2.6

243

A Library of Functions
Objectives

Videos for
this Section

1

Relate linear functions to linear equations.

2

Graph square root and cube root functions.

3

Evaluate and graph piecewise functions.

4

Graph additional basic functions.

The Megatooth Shark
The giant “Megatooth” shark
(Carcharodon megalodon), once
estimated to be 100 to 120 feet
in length, is the largest meateating fish that ever lived. Its
actual length has been the subject of scientific controversy.
Sharks first appeared in the
oceans more than 400 million
years ago, almost 200 million
years before the dinosaurs. A
shark’s skeleton is made of cartilage, which decomposes rather
quickly, making complete shark
fossils rare. Consequently, scientists rely on calcified vertebrae, fossilized teeth, and small skin
scales to reconstruct the evolutionary record of sharks.
The great white shark is the closest living relative to the giant “Megatooth” shark and has been
used as a model to reconstruct the “Megatooth.” John Maisey, curator at the American Museum of
Natural History in New York City, used a partial set of “Megatooth” teeth to make a comparison with
the jaws of the great white shark. In Example 2, we use a formula to calculate the length of the
“Megatooth” on the basis of the height of the tooth of the largest known “Megatooth” specimen.

Objective 1

Linear Functions
We know from Section 2.3 that the graph of a linear equation y = mx + b is a straight
line with slope m and y-intercept b. A linear function has a similar definition.
Linear Functions
Let m and b be real numbers. The function f ( x ) = mx + b is called a linear function.
If m = 0, the function f ( x ) = b is called a constant function. If m = 1 and b = 0,
the resulting function f ( x ) = x is called the identity function. See Figure 2.69.
The domain of a linear function is the interval ( −∞, ∞ ) because the expression
mx + b is defined for any real number x. Figure 2.69 shows that the graph extends indefinitely to the left and right. The range of a nonconstant linear function also is the interval
( −∞, ∞ ) because the graph extends indefinitely upward and downward. The range of a
constant function f ( x ) = b is the single real number b. See Figure 2.69(c).

244

Chapter 2 Graphs and Functions

Graphs of f ( x ) = mx + b
y

O

b

O

x

O

(a)
m.0

Figure 2.69

y

y

y

x

(d)
m 5 1, b 5 0
f (x) 5 x

(c)
m50
f (x) 5 b

(b)
m,0

x

O

x

The graph of a linear function is a nonvertical line with slope m and y-intercept b.

EXAMPLE 1

Writing a Linear Function

Write a linear function g for which g ( 1 ) = 4 and g ( −3 ) = −2.

Solution
We need to find the equation of the line passing through the two points
( x 1, y 1 ) = ( 1, 4 ) and ( x 2 , y 2 ) = ( −3, −2 ).

The slope of the line is given by
m =

Next, we use the point–slope form of a line.

y

(1, 4)
g(x) 5 3 x 1 5
2
2
1
21 0

1

x

(23, 22)

Figure 2.70

y 2 − y1
−2 − 4
−6
3
=
=
= .
−3 − 1
−4
x 2 − x1
2

Graph of y = g ( x )

y − y1 = m( x − x1 )

Point-slope form of a line

3(
x − 1)
2
3
3
y−4 = x−
2
2
3
5
y = x+
2
2
3
5
g( x ) = x +
2
2

Substitute x 1 = 1, y 1 = 4, and m =

y−4 =

3
.
2

Distributive property
Add 4 =

8
to both sides and simplify.
2

Function notation

The graph of the function y = g ( x ) is shown in Figure 2.70.
Practice Problem 1. Write a linear function g for which g ( −2 ) = 2 and g ( 1 ) = 8.

EXAMPLE 2

Determining the Length of the “Megatooth” Shark

The largest known “Megatooth” specimen is a tooth that has a total height of 15.6 centimeters. Calculate the length of the “Megatooth” shark from which it came by using the formula
shark length = ( 0.96 )( height of tooth ) − 0.22,
where shark length is measured in meters and tooth height is measured in centimeters.

Section 2.6 A Library of Functions

245

Solution
Shark length = ( 0.96 )( height of tooth ) − 0.22

Formula

Shark length = ( 0.96 )( 15.6 ) − 0.22

Replace height of
tooth with 15.6.
Simplify.

= 14.756

The shark’s length is approximately 14.8 meters ( ≈48.6 feet ) .
Practice Problem 2. If the “Megatooth” specimen was a tooth measuring 16.4 centimeters, what was the length of the “Megatooth” shark from which it came?

Square Root and Cube Root Functions
So far, we have learned to graph linear functions: y = mx + b; the squaring function:
y = x 2 ; and the cubing function: y = x 3 . We now add some common functions to this list.

Square Root Function Recall (page 60) that for every nonnegative real number x,
there is only one principal square root denoted by x. Therefore, the equation y = x
defines a function, called the square root function. The domain and range of the square
root function is [ 0, ∞ ).
EXAMPLE 3

Graphing the Square Root Function

Graph f ( x ) =

x.

Solution
To sketch the graph of f ( x ) = x, we make a table of values. For convenience, we have
selected the values of x that are perfect squares. See Table 2.10. We then plot the ordered
pairs ( x, y ) and draw a smooth curve through the plotted points. See Figure 2.71.
TABLE 2.10

y

x

y = f ( x)

( x, y )

6

0

0 = 0

( 0, 0 )

5

1

1=1

( 1, 1 )

4

4

4 = 2

( 4, 2 )

9

9 = 3

( 9, 3 )

16

16 = 4

( 16, 4 )

Range

Objective 2

3
2
1

22

0
21

Figure 2.71

The domain of f ( x ) =

f(x) 5 Îx

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

x

Domain

Graph of y =

x

x is [ 0, ∞ ), and its range also is [ 0, ∞ ).

Practice Problem 3. Graph g ( x ) =

−x and find its domain and range.

Cube Root Function There is only one cube root for each real number x. Therefore,
the equation y = 3 x defines a function called the cube root function. Both the domain
and range of the cube root function are ( −∞, ∞ ).

Chapter 2 Graphs and Functions

EXAMPLE 4

Graphing the Cube Root Function

Graph f ( x ) = 3 x.

Solution
We use the point-plotting method to graph f ( x ) = 3 x. For convenience, we select values of x that are perfect cubes. See Table 2.11. The graph of f ( x ) = 3 x is shown in
Figure 2.72.
TABLE 2.11

y

y = f ( x)

( x, y )

−8

3

−8 = −2

( − 8, −2 )

−1

3

−1 = −1

( − 1, −1 )

   0

3

0 = 0

( 0, 0 )

22

   1

3

1=1

( 1, 1 )

24

   8

3

8 = 2

( 8, 2 )

x

4
f(x) 5

2
28

26 24

Figure 2.72

22

0

2

4

3

6

8

x

Graph of y = 3 x

The domain of f ( x ) = 3 x is ( −∞, ∞ ), and its range also is ( −∞, ∞ ).
Practice Problem 4. Graph g ( x ) = 3 −x and find its domain and range.

Objective 3

Piecewise Functions
In the definition of some functions, different rules for assigning output values are used on different parts of the domain. Such functions are called piecewise functions. One example of a
piecewise function is a line graph where data points are connected by straight-line segments.
The graph in Figure 2.73 represents the relative number of Google searches on two
American celebrities. The number 100 on the vertical axis corresponds to the maximum
number of searches on either Taylor Swift or Lebron James recorded during the year 2020,
so 60 means 60% of that maximum. Line graphs are powerful tools to visualize data and to
study trends.
100

Relative number of searches

246

80
Taylor
Swift

60

40

20
Lebron
James
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec
2020 2020 2020 2020 2020 2020 2020 2020 2020 2020 2020 2020

Figure 2.73

Source: Google trends.

In Example 8, we will see how such graphs are created using piecewise functions.

Section 2.6 A Library of Functions

247

PROCEDURE IN ACTION
EXAMPLE 5

Evaluating a Piecewise Function

Objective

Example

Evaluate F ( a ) for a piecewise function F.

Let
 x 2
if x < 1
F ( x ) = 
.
 2 x + 1 if x ≥ 1

Find F ( 0 ) and F ( 2 ).

Step 1 Determine which line of the function’s
definition applies to the number a.

1. Let a = 0. Because 0 < 1, use the first line,
F ( x ) = x 2.
Let a = 2. Because 2 > 1, use the second line,
F ( x ) = 2 x + 1.

Step 2
Step 1.

2. F ( 0 ) = (0) 2 = 0
F ( 2 ) = 2( 2 ) + 1 = 5

Evaluate F ( a ) using the line chosen in

 x 2 if x ≤ −1
Practice Problem 5. Let f ( x ) = 
. Find f ( −2 ) and f ( 3 ).
 2 x if x > −1


EXAMPLE 6

Finding and Evaluating a Piecewise Function

In Peach County, Georgia, a section of the interstate highway has a speed limit of 55 miles
per hour (mph). If you are caught speeding between 56 and 74 mph, your fine is $50 plus
$3 for every mile per hour over 55 mph. For 75 mph and higher, your fine is $150 plus $5
for every mile per hour over 75 mph.
a. Find a piecewise function that gives your fine.
b. What is the fine for driving 60 mph?
c. What is the fine for driving 90 mph?

Solution
a. Let f ( x ) be the piecewise function that represents your fine for speeding at x miles
per hour. We express f ( x ) as a piecewise function:
 50 + 3( x − 55 ), 56 ≤ x < 75
f ( x ) = 
.
 150 + 5( x − 75 ), x ≥ 75
b. The first line of the function means that if 56 ≤ x < 75, your fine is
f ( x ) = 50 + 3( x − 55 ).
Suppose you are caught driving 60 mph. Then we have
f ( x ) = 50 + 3( x − 55 )

Expression used for 56 ≤ x < 75

f ( 60 ) = 50 + 3( 60 − 55 )

Substitute 60 for x.

= 65.

Simplify.

Your fine for speeding at 60 mph is $65.

248

Chapter 2 Graphs and Functions

c. The second line of the function means that if x ≥ 75, your fine is
f ( x ) = 150 + 5( x − 75 ). Suppose you are caught driving 90 mph. Then we have
f ( x ) = 150 + 5( x − 75 )

Expression used for x ≥ 75

f ( 90 ) = 150 + 5( 90 − 75 )

Substitute 90 for x.

= 225.

Simplify.

Your fine for speeding at 90 mph is $225.
Practice Problem 6. Repeat Example 6 if the speeding penalties are changed to
$50 plus $4 for every mile per hour over 55 mph and $200 plus $5 for every mile per hour
over 75 mph.
EXAMPLE 7

Construct the line graph from the data in Table 2.12 and express the function representing
the line graph as a piecewise function.

TABLE 2.12
Time

Value

1
3
5

1
5
2

Solution
Draw three points ( 1, 1 ), ( 3, 5 ), and ( 5, 2 ) and connect them with straight lines (see
Figure 2.74). The graph of f is made up of two parts:
a. A line segment passing through ( 1, 1 ) and ( 3, 5 ) over the interval [ 1, 3 ]. The slope of
this line is

y
7
6
5
4
3
2
1

Writing a Piecewise Function from the Set of Points

m =

(3, 5)

∆y
5−1
4
=
= 2.
=
3−1
2
∆x

Then
(5, 2)
(1, 1)
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8

x

y − y1 = m( x − x1 )
y − y1 = 2( x − x1 )

Point-slope form
Replace m with 2.

y − 1 = 2( x − 1)

Point ( x 1, y 1 ) = ( 1, 1 ) is on the line;
replace both x 1 and y 1 with 1.
Distribute.
Solve for y.

Figure 2.74

y − 1 = 2x − 2
y = 2 x − 1.

So f ( x ) = 2 x − 1 for 1 ≤ x ≤ 3.
b. A line segment passing through ( 3, 5 ) and ( 5, 2 ) over the interval [ 3, 5 ]. The slope of
this line is
m =

∆y
2−5
3
−3
=
=
= − .
5−3
2
2
∆x

Then
y − y1 = m( x − x1 )
3
y − y1 = − ( x − x1 )
2
3
y − 5 = − ( x − 3)
2
3
9
y−5 = − x+
2
2
3
19
y = − x+ .
2
2

Point-slope form
3
Replace m with − .
2
(
Point ( x 1, y 1 ) = 3, 5 ) is on the line;
replace x 1 with 3 and y 1 with 5.
Distribute.
Solve for y.

3
19
So f ( x ) = − x +
for 3 ≤ x ≤ 5.
2
2

Section 2.6 A Library of Functions

Observe that the two line segments that form the graph of this function are joined
together without a gap, so we can attach the point ( 3, 5 ) to either part. Combining (a) and
(b), respectively, we have

TABLE 2.13
Time

Value

1
3
5

5
2
4

249

 2 x − 1
g ( x ) =  3
 − x + 19
2
 2

if 1 ≤ x ≤ 3

.
if 3 < x ≤ 5

Practice Problem 7. Repeat Example 7 for Table 2.13.

Graphing Piecewise Functions
Let’s consider how to graph a piecewise function. The absolute value function,
f ( x ) = x , can be expressed as a piecewise function by using the definition of absolute
value:
 −x if x < 0
.
f ( x ) = x = 
 x if x ≥ 0
The first line in the function means that if x < 0, we use the equation y = f ( x ) = −x.
So, if x = −3, then
y = f ( −3 ) = −( −3 )

y

= 3.

y = f ( 2 ) = 2. Substitute 2 for x in f ( x ) = x.

1

Figure 2.75

1

Graph of y = x

Simplify.

Thus, ( −3, 3 ) is a point on the graph of y = x . However, if x ≥ 0, we use the second
line in the function, which is y = f ( x ) = x. So, if x = 2, then

(2, 2)

0

Substitute −3 for x in f ( x ) = −x.

x

So ( 2, 2 ) is a point on the graph of y = x . The two pieces y = −x and y = x are linear
functions. We graph the appropriate parts of these lines ( y = −x for x < 0 and y = x for
x ≥ 0) to form the graph of y = x . See Figure 2.75.
EXAMPLE 8

Graphing a Piecewise Function

Let
 −2 x + 1 if x < 1
.
F ( x ) = 
 3 x + 1 if x ≥ 1

Sketch the graph of y = F ( x ).

Solution
In the definition of F, the formula changes at x = 1. We call such numbers the transition
points of the formula. For the function F, the only transition point is 1. Generally, to graph
a piecewise function, we graph the function separately over the open intervals determined
by the transition points and then graph the function at the transition points themselves. For
the function y = F ( x ), we graph the equation y = −2 x + 1 on the interval ( −∞, 1 ).
See Figure 2.76(a). Next, we graph the equation y = 3 x + 1 on the interval [ 1, ∞ ) and at
the transition point 1, where y = F ( 1 ) = 3( 1 ) + 1 = 4. See Figure 2.76(b).
Combining these portions, we obtain the graph of y = F ( x ), shown in Figure 2.76(c).
When we come to the end of the part of the graph we are working with, we draw
(i) a closed circle if that point is included.
(ii) an open circle if the point is excluded.
You may find it helpful to think of this procedure as following the graph of y = −2 x + 1
when x is less than 1 and then jumping to the graph of y = 3 x + 1 when x is equal to or
greater than 1.

250

Chapter 2 Graphs and Functions
y

y

y

(1, 4)

(1, 4)

y 5 22x 11
1

1

21 0

1

(1, 21)

x

0

1

x

y 5 F (x), x , 1

TECHNOLOGY CONNECTION
To graph the greatest integer
function, enter Y1 = int ( x ). If
you have your calculator set to
graph in connected mode, you
will get the following incorrect
graph.
5

–5

Figure 2.76

1

(1, 21)
Graph of y 5 F(x)

(b)

(a)

21 0

x

(c)

A piecewise function

 −3 x if x ≤ −1
. Sketch the graph of y = F ( x ).
Practice Problem 8. Let F ( x ) = 
 2 x if x > −1

Some piecewise functions are called step functions. Their graphs look like the steps of
a staircase.
The greatest integer function is denoted by  x , or int ( x ), where  x  = the greatest
integer less than or equal to x. For example,
 2 = 2,  2.3 = 2,  2.7 = 2,  2.99 = 2

5

because 2 is the greatest integer less than or equal to 2, 2.3, 2.7, and 2.99. Similarly,
−2 = −2, −1.9 = −2, −1.1 = −2, −1.001 = −2

–5

For the graph to appear
correctly, change from the
connected to the dot mode.

because −2 is the greatest integer less than or equal to −2, −1.9, −1.1, and −1.001.
In general, if m is an integer such that m ≤ x < m + 1, then  x  = m. In other
words, if x is between two consecutive integers m and m + 1, then  x  is assigned the
smaller integer m.

5

EXAMPLE 9
–5

5

Graph the greatest integer function f ( x ) =  x .

Solution
Choose a typical closed interval between two consecutive integers—say, the interval [ 2, 3 ].
We know that between 2 and 3, the greatest integer function’s value is 2. In symbols,
if 2 ≤ x < 3, then  x  = 2. Similarly, if 1 ≤ x < 2, then  x  = 1. Therefore, the values of  x  are constant between each pair of consecutive integers and jump by one unit at
each integer. The graph of f ( x ) =  x  is shown in Figure 2.77.

–5

Note that the step from
0 ≤ x ≤ 1 is obscured by the
x-axis.

y

Practice Problem 9. Find the values of f ( x ) =  x  for x = −3.4 and x = 4.7.

3

The greatest integer function f can be interpreted as a piecewise function:

1
0

Figure 2.77

Graphing a Step Function

1

3

x

Graph of y =  x 




 −2 if −2 ≤ x < −1

 −1 if −1 ≤ x < 0 .
f ( x ) =  x  = 
 0 if 0 ≤ x < 1

0 ≤ x < 2
 1 if




Section 2.6 A Library of Functions

EXAMPLE 10

251

Volume Buying

Super Buy offers volume pricing of certain uniforms. If you buy 1–10 uniforms you pay
$75 each, from 11–30 uniforms you pay $70 each, from 31–60 uniforms you pay $65 each,
and if you buy 61 or more you pay $60 each. Define and graph the function
a. f ( x ) that gives the price per uniform when purchasing x uniforms.
b. g ( x ) that gives the total price per order when purchasing x uniforms.

Solution
a. Each line of the piecewise function gives the purchase price per uniform for x uniforms.

Piecewise graphs with integer
domains are frequently
graphed continuously, for visual
emphasis, between the integers
in the specified intervals. In
Example 10, it is understood
that a purchase of 3.47
uniforms is not possible.

y
80
f

 75 if 1 ≤ x ≤ 10

 70 if 11 ≤ x ≤ 30
f (x) = 
 65 if 31 ≤ x ≤ 60

 60 if 61 ≤ x

Price per unit

SIDE NOTE

70

60

50
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 x
Number of units sold

b. Each line of the piecewise function gives the total purchase price for x uniforms.
y
6000

g

 75 x if 1 ≤ x ≤ 10

 70 x if 11 ≤ x ≤ 30
g( x ) = 
 65 x if 31 ≤ x ≤ 60

 60 x if 61 ≤ x

Price per order

5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
0

20

40
60
80
Number of units sold

100 x

Practice Problem 10. Outdoor World offers volume pricing of certain backpacks. If
you buy 1–5 backpacks you pay $25 each, from 6–15 backpacks you pay $22 each, from
16–25 backpacks you pay $20 each, and if you buy 26 or more you pay $18 each. Define
and graph the function
a. f ( x ) that gives the price per backpack when purchasing x backpacks.
b. g ( x ) that gives the total price per order when purchasing x backpacks.

Objective 4

Basic Functions
As you progress through this course and future mathematics courses, you will repeatedly
come across a small list of basic functions. The following box lists some of these common
algebraic functions, along with their properties. You should try to produce these graphs by
plotting points and using symmetries. The unit length in all of the graphs shown is the same
on both axes.

252

Chapter 2 Graphs and Functions

A Library of Basic Functions
Constant Function

Identity Function

Squaring Function

y

y

y

f(x) 5 c

(0, c)
0

0

x

x

0

x

Domain: ( −∞, ∞ )
Range: { c }
Constant on ( −∞, ∞ )
Even function ( y-axis symmetry)

Domain: ( −∞, ∞ )
Range: ( −∞, ∞ )
Increasing on ( −∞, ∞ )
Odd function (origin symmetry)

Domain: ( −∞, ∞ )
Range: [ 0, ∞ )
Decreasing on ( −∞, 0 )
Increasing on ( 0, ∞ )
Even function (y-axis symmetry)

Cubing Function

Absolute Value Function

Square Root Function

y

y

0

x

y

0

x

Domain: ( −∞, ∞ )
Range: ( −∞, ∞ )
Increasing on ( −∞, ∞ )
Odd function (origin symmetry)

Domain: ( −∞, ∞ )
Range: [ 0, ∞ )
Decreasing on ( −∞, 0 )
Increasing on ( 0, ∞ )
Even function (y-axis symmetry)

Cube Root Function

Reciprocal Function

3

y

y

0

x

Domain: ( −∞, ∞ )
Range: ( −∞, ∞ )
Increasing on ( −∞, ∞ )
Odd function (origin symmetry)

0

0

x

Domain: [ 0, ∞ )
Range: [ 0, ∞ )
Increasing on ( 0, ∞ )
Neither even nor odd (no symmetry)
Reciprocal Square Function

f(x) 5 12
x

1
x

y

x

Domain: ( −∞, 0 ) ∪ ( 0, ∞ )
Range: ( −∞, 0 ) ∪ ( 0, ∞ )
Decreasing on ( −∞, 0 ) ∪ ( 0, ∞ )
Odd function (origin symmetry)

0

x

Domain: ( −∞, 0 ) ∪ ( 0, ∞ )
Range: ( 0, ∞ )
Increasing on ( −∞, 0 )
Decreasing on ( 0, ∞ )
Even function (y-axis symmetry)

Section 2.6 A Library of Functions
Rational Power Functions
3
f(x) 5 x 2 5

1 2

y

1

1
1

0

x

Domain: [ 0, ∞ )
Range: [ 0, ∞ )
Increasing on ( 0, ∞ )
Neither even nor odd (no symmetry)

2.6

f(x) 5 [[x]]

f(x) 5 x 3 5 x 3
y

0

Greatest Integer Function

1 2

1 2

2

1 3
x2

y

0

x

x

1

Domain: ( −∞, ∞ )
Range: [ 0, ∞ )
Decreasing on ( −∞, 0 )
Increasing on ( 0, ∞ )
Even function (y-axis symmetry)

Domain: ( −∞, ∞ )
Range: { . . . −3, −2, −1, 0, 1 2, 3, . . . }
Neither even nor odd (no symmetry)

Exercises

Videos for
select exercises

Concepts and Vocabulary
1. The graph of the linear function f ( x ) = b is a(n)
line.
2. The absolute value function can be expressed as a piecewise
function by writing f ( x ) = x =
.
 x 2 + 2 if x ≤ 1
3. The graph of the function f ( x ) = 
will
 ax
if x > 1

have a break at x = 1 unless a =
.
4. The line that is the graph of f ( x ) = −2 x + 3 has slope
.
5. True or False. The graph of f ( x ) = mx + b cannot be a
vertical line.
6. True or False. No piecewise function has domain
( −∞, ∞ ).
7. True or False. The function f ( x ) = x 2 is decreasing on
( −∞, 0 ).
8. True or False. The function f ( x ) =  x  is increasing on
the interval ( 0, 3 ).

Building Skills
In Exercises 9–18, write a linear function f that has the indicated values. Sketch the graph of f.
9. f ( 0 ) = 1, f ( −1 ) = 0

10. f ( 1 ) = 0, f ( 2 ) = 1

11. f ( −1 ) = 1, f ( 2 ) = 7

12. f ( −1 ) = −5, f ( 2 ) = 4

f ( 1 ) = 1, f ( 2 ) = −2

14. f ( 1 ) = −1, f ( 3 ) = 5

15. f ( −2 ) = 2, f ( 2 ) = 4

16. f ( 2 ) = 2, f ( 4 ) = 5
1
18. f ( 1 ) = , f ( 4 ) = −2
4

13.

17. f ( 0 ) = −1, f ( 3 ) = −3

253

19. Let
 x
f ( x ) = 
 2

if x ≥ 2
.
if x < 2

a. Find f ( 1 ), f ( 2 ), and f ( 3 ).
b. Sketch the graph of y = f ( x ).
20. Let
 2 x
g ( x ) = 
 x

if x < 0
.
if x ≥ 0

a. Find g ( −1 ), g ( 0 ), and g ( 1 ).
b. Sketch the graph of y = g ( x ).
21. Let
 1
f ( x ) = 
 −1

if x > 0
.
if x < 0

a. Find f ( −15 ) and f ( 12 ).
b. Sketch the graph of y = f ( x ).
c. Find the domain and the range of f .
22. Let
 2 x + 4
g ( x ) = 
 x + 2

if x > 1
.
if x ≤ 1

a. Find g(−3), g(1), and g(3).
b. Sketch the graph of y = g ( x ).
c. Find the domain and the range of g.

254

Chapter 2 Graphs and Functions

Applying the Concepts

In Exercises 23–36, sketch the graph of each function and
from the graph, find its domain and its range.
 |x| if x < 1
 −2 x if x < 0
24. g ( x ) =  2
23. f ( x ) =  2
 x
 x
if x ≥ 0
if x ≥ 1


 1
 3 x if x < 1

if x < 0

25. g ( x ) =  x
26. h ( x ) = 

 x if x ≥ 1

 x if x ≥ 0
 x  if x < 1
 x 3 if x < 0


27. f ( x ) =  3
28. g ( x ) = 
 x if x ≥ 1
 x if x ≥ 0


 1
 |x| if x < 1

if x < 0
29. g ( x ) =  3
30. f ( x ) =  x
 x

if x ≥ 1

 x  if x ≥ 0
 |x|

31. f ( x ) = 
 x

 3 x
32. g ( x ) = 
 2 x


41. Human foot length. The height H of females can be
­estimated from their foot length x by using the equation
H = 0.920 x + 145 where all measurements are in
­centimeters. Approximately how tall, in feet, is a female
whose foot length is 7.5 inches? ( 1 inch = 2.54 cm. )
42. Human foot length. The height H of males can be
estimated from their foot length x by using the equation
H = 0.85 x + 155 where all measurements are in
­centimeters. Approximately how tall, in feet, is a male whose
foot length is 9 inches? ( 1 inch = 2.54 cm. )
43. Converting volume. To convert the volume of a liquid
measured in ounces to a volume measured in liters, we
use the fact that 1 liter ≈ 33.81 ounces. Let x denote the
volume measured in ounces and y denote the volume
measured in liters.

if − 2 ≤ x < 1

a. Write an equation for the linear function y = f ( x ). What
are the domain and range of f ?
b. Compute f ( 3 ). What does it mean?
c. How many liters of liquid are in a typical soda can containing 12 ounces of liquid?

if x ≥ 1
if −8 ≤ x < 1
if x ≥ 1

 x 
33. g ( x ) = 
 −2 x


if 1 ≤ x ≤ 4

 |x|
34. h ( x ) = 
 x


if x < 0
if 0 ≤ x ≤ 4

44. Boiling point and elevation. The boiling point B of water (in
degrees Fahrenheit) at elevation h (in thousands of feet) above
sea level is given by the linear function B ( h ) = −1.8h + 212.

if x < 1

 2 x + 3

35. f ( x ) =  x + 1

 −x + 3


a. Find and interpret the intercepts of the graph of the function y = B ( h ).
b. Find the domain of this function.
c. Find the elevation at which water boils at 98.6 ° F. Why is
this height dangerous to humans?

if x < −2
if −2 ≤ x < 1

45. Pressure at sea depth. The pressure P in atmospheres
(atm) at a depth d feet is given by the linear function

if x ≥ 1

 −2 x + 1

36. g ( x ) =  2 x + 1

 x + 2

if x ≤ −1
if −1 < x < 2

P( d ) =

if x ≥ 2

a. Find and interpret the intercepts of y = P ( d ).
b. Find P ( 0 ), P ( 10 ), P ( 33 ), and P ( 100 ).
c. Find the depth at which the pressure is 5 atmospheres.

In Exercises 37–40, write a piecewise function for the given graph.
y

37.

(2, 3)
(21, 0)

(0, 3)

(3, 0)

a. Find the speed of sound at 90 ° F.
b. Find the temperature at which the speed of sound is 1100
feet per second.

y 5 f(x)

y 5 f(x)
0

46. Speed of sound. The speed V of sound (in feet per second)
in air at temperature T (in degrees Fahrenheit) is given by the
linear function V ( T ) = 1055 + 1.1T .

y

38.

0

x

(4, 0)

x

47. Manufacturer’s cost. A manufacturer of printers has a total
cost per day consisting of a fixed overhead of $6000 plus
product costs of $50 per printer.

(2, 21)

y

39.
(22, 4)

40.
(2, 4)

(22, 2)

(24, 3)

(2, 1)
0

(23, 0)
y 5g(x)

(3, 0)

x

1
d + 1.
33

y

(0, 3)

(4, 3)
y 5g(x)

(22, 0) 0

(2, 0)

x

a. Express the total cost C as a function of the number x of
printers produced.
b. Draw the graph of y = C ( x ). Interpret the y-intercept.
c. How many printers were manufactured on a day when the
total cost was $11,500?
48. Supply function. When the price p of a commodity is $10
per unit, 750 units of it are sold. For every $1 increase in the
unit price, the supply q increases by 100 units.
a. Write the linear function q = f ( p ).
b. Find the supply when the price is $15 per unit.
c. What is the price at which 1750 units can be supplied?

Section 2.6 A Library of Functions
49. Apartment rental. Suppose a two-bedroom apartment in a
neighborhood near your school rents for $900 per month. If
you move in after the first of the month, the rent is prorated;
that is, it is reduced linearly at $30 per day.
a. Suppose you move into the apartment x days after the
first of the month. (Assume that the month has 30 days.)
Express the rent R as a function of x.
b. Compute the rent if you move in six days after the first of
the month.
c. When did you move into the apartment if the landlord
charged you rent of $600?
50. COVID-19 spread. The number of confirmed cases of
COVID-19 in the United States was 2.69 million in July
2020; it was 6.07 million in September 2020. Assume that
the number of confirmed cases has been changing linearly
with time.
a. Express the number of confirmed cases in the United States
as a function of t, the number of months after July 2020 (so
0 represents July 2020).
b. If the trend continues, what was the number of confirmed
cases in the United States in November 2020?
c. If the trend continued, when was the number of confirmed
cases in the United States be approximately 13 million?
51. Breathing capacity. Suppose the average maximum breathing capacity for humans drops linearly from 100% at age 20
to 40% at age 80. What age corresponds to 50% capacity?
52. Drug dosage for children. If a is the adult dosage of a
medicine and t is the child’s age, then the Friend’s rule for
2
ta.
the child’s dosage y is given by the formula y =
25
a. Suppose the adult dosage is 60 milligrams. Find the dosage
for a 5-year-old child.
b. How old would a child have to be in order to be prescribed
an adult dosage?
53. Air pollution. In Ballerenia, the average number y of deaths
per month was observed to be linearly related to the concentration x of sulfur dioxide in the air. Suppose there are 30
deaths when x = 150 milligrams per cubic meter and 50
deaths when x = 420 milligrams per cubic meter.
a. Write y as a function of x.
b. Find the number of deaths when x = 350 milligrams per
cubic meter.
c. If the number of deaths per month is 70, what is the concentration of sulfur dioxide in the air?
54. Child shoe sizes. Children’s shoe sizes start with size 0,
11
having an insole length L of 3 inches and each full size
12
1
being inch longer.
3
a. Write the equation y = L ( S ), where S is the shoe size.
b. Find the length of the insole of a child’s shoe of size 4.
c. What size (to the nearest half size) shoe will fit a child
whose insole length is 5.7 inches?

a. Graph the function y = T ( x ).
b. Find the tax liability on each taxable income.
(i) $12, 000
(ii) $20, 000
(iii) $50, 000
c. Find your taxable income if you had each tax liability.
(ii) $1200

(i) $600
(iii) $2300

56. Algae control. Five gallons of an experimental chemical
solution are poured into a lake to control the growth of
algae that drastically decreases its oxygen level. The
amount of the solution remaining in the lake decreases
rapidly each month and is completely gone after six
months. The amount of the 5 gallon solution remaining in
the lake after x months is given in the following table.
Assume the amount of solution remaining in the lake
decreases linearly during each month. For example, the
remaining solution decreases linearly from 5 gallons to
4.5 gallons during the first month.
x

Amount remaining

1

4.5

2

3.6

3

2.3

4

1.2

5

0.5

6

0

a. Express the information given in the table as a six-part
piecewise-defined function f, using x as a variable.
b. Find the amount remaining in the lake after two and a half
months.

Beyond the Basics
In Exercises 57 and 58, find the value of a such that the graph
of the piecewise-defined function f does not have any gaps
(the two formulas that define f agree at the transition point).
 2 x − 1 if 1 ≤ x ≤ 3
57. f ( x ) = 
 a − 3 x if 3 < x ≤ 3
 1 − x
if 1 ≤ x ≤ 3
58. f ( x ) = 
 ax + 3 if 3 < x ≤ 5
In Exercises 59 and 60, a function is given. For each function,
a. find the domain and range.
b. find the intervals over which the function is increasing,
decreasing, or constant.
c. state whether the function is odd, even, or neither.
1
60. f ( x ) =
59. f ( x ) = x −  x 
 x

61. The windchill index (WCI). Suppose the outside air temperature is T degrees Fahrenheit and the wind speed is v
miles per hour. A formula for the WCI based on observations is as follows:
0 ≤ υ ≤ 4
 T
if 0 ≤ x < 20, 000

=
WCI
υ
υ
91.4
(
91.4
)
0.0203
0.304
0.474
+
−
T
−
−
(
) 4 < υ < 45 .
.


if x ≥ 20, 000
 1.6T − 55
υ ≥ 45

55. State income tax. Suppose a state’s income tax code states
that the tax liability T on x dollars of taxable income is as
follows:
 0.04 x
T ( x ) = 
 800 + 0.06( x − 20, 000 )


255

Chapter 2 Graphs and Functions

63. Parking cost. The cost C of parking a car at the metropolitan airport is $4 for the first hour and $2 for each additional
hour or fraction thereof. Write the cost function C ( x ), where
x is the number of parking hours, in terms of the greatest
integer function.
64. Car rentals. The weekly cost of renting a compact car
from U-Rent is $150. There is no charge for driving the first
100 miles, but there is a 20¢ charge for each mile (or fraction
thereof) driven over 100 miles.
a. Express the cost C of renting a car for a week and driving it
for x miles.
b. Sketch the graph of y = C ( x ).
c. How many miles were driven if the weekly rental cost was
$190?

Critical Thinking / Discussion / Writing
In Exercises 65 and 66, select the graph that best describes
the situation.
65. An airplane flying from Tampa, Florida, to Atlanta, Georgia
a.
b.

Height

Height

66. Cooling a jar of hot water by dumping a lot of ice in the jar
b.

Temperature

a.

Time

c.

Time

d.

Time

67. Let the domain of a function f be ( −∞, ∞ ) and let f be
increasing on the interval ( 0, 1 ) and decreasing on the interval ( 1, ∞ ). What information can we deduce about the
behavior of the function f on interval ( −∞, 0 ) if
a. we assume additionally that f is even?
b. we assume additionally that f is odd?

a. we assume additionally that f is even?
b. we assume additionally that f is odd?
Time

Time

68. Let the domain of a function f be ( −∞, ∞ ) and let f have a
relative maximum at x = 1 and relative minimum at x = 3.
What information can we deduce about the relative maxima
and minima of the function f on the interval ( −∞, 0 ) if

Height

Height

Time

Time

Temperature

a. Express the cost C (in cents) of mailing a letter weighing
x ounces.
b. How much will it cost to mail a 2.3 ounce first-class letter
within the United States via USPS?
c. Graph the function y = C ( x ) for 0 ≤ x ≤ 6.

d.

c.

Temperature

a. Find the WCI to the nearest degree if the outside air temperature is 40 ° F and
(i) υ = 2 miles per hour.
(ii) υ = 16 miles per hour.
(iii) υ = 50 miles per hour.
b. Find the air temperature to the nearest degree if
(i) the WCI is −58 ° F and υ = 36 miles per hour.
(ii) the WCI is −10 ° F and υ = 49 miles per hour.
62. Postage-rate function. The U.S. Postal Service uses the
function f ( x ) = −−x , called the ceiling integer function,
to determine postal charges. For instance, if you have an
envelope that weighs 3.01 ounces, you will be charged the
rate for f ( 3.01 ) = −−3.01 = −( −4 ) = 4 ounces. In
2020, it cost 55¢ for the first ounce (or a fraction of it) and
15¢ for each additional ounce (or a fraction of it) to mail a
first-class letter in the United States. (Source: www.stamps.
com/usps/postage-rate-increase)

Temperature

256

Time

Section 2.7 Transformations of Functions

GETTING READY

257

for the Next Section

REVIEW CONCEPTS
Completing the square (Section 1.3, page 106)
Symmetry (Section 2.2, page 183)
Graphs of basic functions (Section 2.6, page 252)
REVIEW SKILLS
Completing the square (Section 1.3, page 106)
In Exercises GR1–GR4, write the number that must be added
to the given expression so that the result is a perfect square
trinomial. Write the result in the form ( x + b ) 2 .
GR1. x 2 + 8 x
GR2. x 2 − 6 x
2
4
GR3. x 2 − x
GR4. x 2 + x
3
5

GR6. If we subtract 2 from each x-coordinate of the graph of f,
we will obtain the graph of y =
.
GR7. If we replace each x-coordinate with its opposite in the
graph of f, we will obtain the graph of y =

.

GR8. If we replace each y-coordinate with its opposite in the
graph of f, we will obtain the graph of y =

.

In Exercises GR9–GR12, sketch the graphs of f and g on the
same coordinate axes.
GR9. f ( x ) = x 2 and g ( x ) = x 2 + 1
GR10. f ( x ) = x and g ( x ) = x + 2
GR11. f ( x ) =

x and g ( x ) =

−x

GR12. f ( x ) = x 2 and g ( x ) = −x 2

Sketch the graph of a function (Section 2.4, page 216)
For Exercises GR5–GR8, recall that the graph of a function f
is the graph of the set of ordered pairs ( x, f ( x )) .
GR5. If we add 3 to each y-coordinate of the graph of f, we will
obtain the graph of y =
.

2.7

Transformations of Functions
Objectives

Videos for
this Section

1

Define transformations of functions.

2

Use vertical or horizontal shifts to graph functions.

3

Use reflections to graph functions.

4

Use stretching or compressing to graph functions.

5

Use a sequence of transformations to graph functions.

Measuring Blood Pressure
Blood pressure is the force of
blood per unit area against the
walls of the arteries. Blood pressure is recorded as two numbers:
the systolic pressure (as the heart
beats) and the diastolic pressure
(as the heart relaxes between
beats). If your blood pressure is
“120 over 80,” it is rising to a maximum of 120 millimeters of mercury
as the heart beats and is falling to
a minimum of 80 millimeters of
mercury as the heart relaxes.
The most precise way to measure blood pressure is to place a small glass tube in an artery and let the blood flow out and up as high
as the heart can pump it. That was the way Stephen Hales (1677–1761), the first investigator of blood

258

Chapter 2 Graphs and Functions
pressure, learned that a horse’s heart could pump blood 8 feet 3 inches, up a tall tube. Such a test, however, consumed a great deal of blood. Jean Louis Marie Poiseuille (1797–1869) greatly improved the
process by using a mercury-filled manometer, which allowed a smaller, narrower tube.
In Exercises 124 and 125, we investigate Poiseuille’s Law for arterial blood flow.

Transformations

Objective 1

If a new function is formed by performing certain operations on a given function f , then
the graph of the new function is called a transformation of the graph of f . For example,
the graphs of y = x + 2 and y = x − 3 are transformations of the graph of y = x ;
that is, the graph of each is a special modification of the graph of y = x .

Vertical and Horizontal Shifts

Objective 2
TECHNOLOGY CONNECTION
Many graphing calculators use
abs ( x ) for x . The graphs of
y = x , y = x − 3, and
y = x + 2 illustrate that these
graphs are identical in shape.
They differ only in vertical
placement.

A transformation that changes only the position of a graph but not its shape is called a
rigid transformation. We first consider rigid transformations involving vertical shifts
and horizontal shifts of a graph.
EXAMPLE 1

Graphing Vertical Shifts

Let f ( x ) = x , g ( x ) = x + 2, and h ( x ) = x − 3. Sketch the graphs of these functions on the same coordinate plane. Describe how the graphs of g and h relate to the graph of f .

Solution
Make a table of values and graph the equations y = f ( x ), y = g ( x ), and y = h ( x ).
TABLE 2.14

6

–5

x

y = x

g( x ) = x + 2

h( x ) = x − 3

−5
−3
−1
0
1
3
5

5

7

2

3
1
0
1
3
5

5
3
2
3
5
7

−2
−3
−2
0
2

0

5

y
–4

g(x) 5 |x| 1 2
(x, |x| 1 2)
(x, |x|)
y 5 |x|
(x, |x| 2 3)

1
0

1

x
h(x) 5 |x| 2 3

Figure 2.78

Vertical shifts of y = x

Notice that in Table 2.14 and Figure 2.78, each point ( x, x ) on the graph of f has a
corresponding point ( x, x + 2 ) on the graph of g and ( x, x − 3 ) on the graph of h. So
the graph of g ( x ) = x + 2 is the graph of y = x shifted 2 units up, and the graph of
y = x − 3 is the graph of y = x shifted 3 units down.

Section 2.7 Transformations of Functions

Practice Problem 1. Let

y
g(x) 5 f(x) 1 d

f ( x ) = x 3 , g ( x ) = x 3 + 1, and h ( x ) = x 3 − 2.
Sketch the graphs of all three functions on the same coordinate plane. Describe how the
graphs of g and h relate to the graph of f .

(x, y 1 d)
d

Example 1 illustrates the concept of the vertical (up or down) shift of a graph.

(x, y)
y 5 f (x) x

O

y
y 5 f (x)
(x, y)
O

d

x

(x, y 2 d)

Shift down, d . 0

Figure 2.79

Vertical Shift
Let d > 0. The graph of g ( x ) = f ( x ) + d is the graph of y = f ( x ) shifted d
units up, and the graph of h ( x ) = f ( x ) − d is the graph of y = f ( x ) shifted d
units down. See Figure 2.79. If ( x, y ) is a point on the graph of y = f ( x ), then the
corresponding point ( x, y + d ) is on the graph of g ( x ) = f ( x ) + d and the point
( x, y − d ) is on the graph of h ( x ) = f ( x ) − d .

Shift up, d . 0

h(x) 5 f(x) 2 d

259

Vertical shifts

Next, we consider the operation that shifts a graph horizontally.
EXAMPLE 2

Writing Functions for Horizontal Shifts

x 2 , g ( x ) = ( x − 2 ) 2 , and h ( x ) = ( x + 3 ) 2. A table of values for

Let f ( x ) =
f , g,
and h is given in Table 2.15. The three functions f , g, and h are graphed on the same coordinate plane in Figure 2.80. Describe how the graphs of g and h relate to the graph of f .
TABLE 2.15
x

f ( x) = x2

g( x ) = ( x − 2) 2

x

f ( x) = x2

h( x ) = ( x + 3) 2

−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4

16
9
4
1
0
1
4
9
16

36
25
16
9
4
1
0
1
4

−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4

16
9
4
1
0
1
4
9
16

1
0
1
4
9
16
25
36
49

(a)

(b)
y

(x, x2)
, x2)

x2
1
0

Figure 2.80

1 2

x

Horizontal shifts

Solution
First, notice that all three functions are squaring functions.
a. Each point ( x, x 2 ) on the graph of f has a corresponding point ( x + 2, x 2 )
on the graph of g because g ( x + 2 ) = ( x + 2 − 2 ) 2 = x 2. So the graph of
g ( x ) = ( x − 2 ) 2 is just the graph of f ( x ) = x 2 shifted 2 units to the right.
Noticing that f ( 0 ) = 0 and g ( 2 ) = 0 will help you remember which way to shift
the graph. Table 2.15(a) and Figure 2.80 illustrate these ideas.

260

Chapter 2 Graphs and Functions

b. Each point ( x, x 2 ) on the graph of f has a corresponding point ( x − 3, x 2 )
on the graph of h because h ( x − 3 ) = ( x − 3 + 3) 2 = x 2 . So the graph of
h ( x ) = ( x + 3 ) 2 is just the graph of f ( x ) = x 2 shifted 3 units to the left. Noticing
that f ( 0 ) = 0 and h ( −3 ) = 0 will help you remember which way to shift the graph.
Table 2.15(b) and Figure 2.80 confirm these considerations.
Practice Problem 2. Let
f ( x ) = x 3, g ( x ) = ( x − 1 )3, and h ( x ) = ( x + 2 )3.
Sketch the graphs of all three functions on the same coordinate plane. Describe how the
graphs of g and h relate to the graph of f .	
Horizontal Shifts
Let c > 0. The graph of y = f ( x − c ) is the graph of y = f ( x ) shifted c units to the
right. The graph of y = f ( x + c ) is the graph of y = f ( x ) shifted c units to the left.
See Figure 2.81. If ( x, y ) is a point on the graph of f, then the corresponding point
( x + c, y ) is on the graph of y = f ( x − c ) and the point ( x − c, y ) is on the graph of
y = f ( x + c ).

y

y
y 5 f (x)

y 5 f (x 2 c)
(x, y)

c

O

(x 1 c, y)

(x 2 c, y)

x

O

(x, y)
x

y 5 f (x 1 c)

y 5 f (x)

Shift left, c . 0

Shift right, c . 0

Figure 2.81

c

Horizontal shifts

PROCEDURE IN ACTION
EXAMPLE 3

Graphing Combined Vertical and Horizontal Shifts

Objective

Example

Sketch the graph of g ( x ) = f ( x ± c ) ± d, where f is a
function whose graph is known, c > 0, d > 0.

Sketch the graph of g ( x ) =

x + 2 − 3.

Step 1

Identify and graph the known function f.

1. Choose f ( x ) = x. Domain: [ 0, ∞ ); range: [ 0, ∞ ).
The graph of y = x is shown in Step 4.

Step 2

Identify the positive constants c and d.

2. g ( x ) =

Step 3
(i) Graph y = f ( x − c ) by shifting the graph of
f horizontally c units to the right. Add c to the x-coordinate
of each point.
(ii) Graph y = f ( x + c ) by shifting the graph of
f horizontally c units to the left. Subtract c from the
x-coordinate of each point.

x + 2 − 3, so c = 2 and d = 3.

3. Because c = 2 > 0, the graph of y = x + 2 is the
graph of f shifted horizontally 2 units to the left. See
the blue graph in Step 4.

Section 2.7 Transformations of Functions

Step 4

261

4. Graph y = x + 2 − 3 by shifting the graph of
y = x + 2 down 3 units. Domain: [ −2, ∞ );
range: [ −3, ∞ ). See the red graph below.

(i) Graph y = f ( x ± c ) + d by shifting the graph
of y = f ( x ± c ) vertically up d units. Add d to the
y-coordinate of each point.
(ii) Graph y = f ( x ± c ) − d by shifting the graph of
y = f ( x ± c ) vertically down d units. Subtract d from
the y-coordinate of each point.

y
3
2
1, 1

1
0

1

(1, 1)
x
1

2

3 x

2

Horizontal and vertical shifts

Practice Problem 3. Sketch the graph of
f (x) =

x − 2 + 3.

Reflections

Objective 3

We now consider rigid transformations that reflect a graph about a coordinate axis.
y

Comparing the Graphs of y = f ( x ) and y = − f ( x ) Consider the graph of

f ( x ) = x 2 , shown in Figure 2.82. Table 2.16 gives some values for f ( x ) and g ( x ) = − f ( x ).
Note that the y-coordinate of each point in the graph of g ( x ) = − f ( x ) is the opposite of the
y-coordinate of the corresponding point on the graph of f ( x ). So the graph of y = −x 2 is the
reflection of the graph of y = x 2 about the x-axis. This means that the points ( x, x 2 ) and
( x, − x 2 ) are the same distance from, but on opposite sides of, the x-axis. See Figure 2.82.

(x, x2)

x

O

Figure 2.82
the x-axis

TABLE 2.16

Reflection about

y

Figure 2.83
the x-axis

f ( x) = x2

g ( x ) = − f ( x ) = −x 2

−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3

9
4
1
0
1
4
9

−9
−4
−1
0
−1
−4
−9

Reflection about the x-axis
The graph of g ( x ) = − f ( x ) is a reflection of the graph of y = f ( x ) about the x-axis. If a
point ( x, y ) is on the graph of f , then the point ( x, − y ) is on the graph of g. See Figure 2.83.

(x, y)

O

x

x

Reflection about

Comparing the Graphs of y = f ( x ) and y = f (−x ) To compare the graphs of

f ( x ) and g ( x ) = f ( −x ), consider the graph of f ( x ) = x. Then f ( −x ) = −x. See
Figure 2.84. Table 2.17 gives some values for f ( x ) and g ( x ) = f ( −x ). The domain of f
is [ 0, ∞ ), and the domain of g is ( −∞, 0 ]. Each point ( x, y ) on the graph of f has a corresponding point ( −x, y ) on the graph of g. So the graph of y = f ( −x ) is the reflection
of the graph of y = f ( x ) about the y-axis. This means that the points ( x, x ) and
( −x, x ) are the same distance from, but on opposite sides of, the y-axis. See Figure 2.84.

262

Chapter 2 Graphs and Functions
TABLE 2.17
f ( x) =

x

y

−4
−1
   0
   1
   4

x

−x

g( x ) =

Undefined
Undefined
0
1
2

   4
   1
   0
−1
−4

2
1
0
Undefined
Undefined

y
4

−x

(4, 2)
(1, 1)
1

x

0

FIGURE 2.84

1

4 x

Graphing y =

−x

(x, y)

Reflection about the y-axis
O

Figure 2.85
the y-axis

x

Reflection about

The graph of g ( x ) = f ( −x ) is a reflection of the graph of y = f ( x ) about the
y-axis. If a point ( x, y ) is on the graph of f , then the point ( −x, y ) is on the graph of
g. See Figure 2.85.

EXAMPLE 4

Combining Transformations

Explain how the graph of y = − x − 2 + 3 can be obtained from the graph of y = x .

Solution
Start with the graph of y = x . Follow the point ( 0, 0 ) on y = x . See Figure 2.86(a).
Step 1

Shift the graph of y = x to the right 2 units to obtain the graph of
y = x − 2 . Add 2 to the x-coordinate of each point. The point ( 0, 0 ) moves
to ( 2, 0 ). See Figure 2.86(b).

Step 2

Reflect the graph of y = x − 2 about the x-axis to obtain the graph of
y = − x − 2 . Change the y-coordinate of each point to its opposite. The
point ( 2, 0 ) remains ( 2, 0 ). See Figure 2.86(c).

Step 3

Finally, shift the graph of y = − x − 2 up 3 units to obtain the graph of
y = − x − 2 + 3. Add 3 to the y-coordinate of each point. The point ( 2, 0 )
moves to ( 2, 3 ). See Figure 2.86(d).

Horizontal shift
shift 2 units right
y
6

24

22

Figure 2.86

Reflection about the x-axis

y
6

y 5 |x|

4

4

2

2

0

2
(0, 0)
(a)

4

0

x

Vertical shift
shift 3 units up

y
24 22

y 5 |x 22|

0
22

(2, 0)

4

24 y 5 2 x 22

|

(2, 0) 4

6

8 x

26

(b)

(c)

y
4

6 x

(2, 3)

2

|

24

22

0

2

4

x

22 y 5 2|x 22| 1 3
(d)

Transformations of y = x

Practice Problem 4. Explain how the graph of y = −( x − 1 ) 2 + 2 can be obtained
from the graph of y = x 2 .
EXAMPLE 5

Graphing y = f ( x )

Use the graph of f ( x ) = ( x + 1 ) 2 − 4 to sketch the graph of y = f ( x ) .

Solution
The graph of f ( x ) = ( x + 1 ) 2 − 4 is obtained by shifting the graph of y = x 2 left by
1 unit and then shifting the resulting graph down by 4 units. See Figure 2.87(a). The function f has domain ( −∞, ∞ ) and range [ −4, ∞ ).

Section 2.7 Transformations of Functions

We know that

 y
y = 
 −y


if y ≥ 0
if y < 0

263

.

This means that the portion of the graph on or above the x-axis ( y ≥ 0 ) is unchanged
and the portion of the graph below the x-axis ( y < 0 ) is reflected above the x-axis. See
Figure 2.87(b). The function f has domain ( −∞, ∞ ) and range [ 0, ∞ ).
f (x) 5 (x 1 1)2 2 4

f (x) 5 (x 1 1)2 2 4
2

y
4

1

3

y

(21, 4)

23 22 21 0
21

1

2

2

3 x

1

23

23 22 21 0
21

24

22

22

(21, 24)

Figure 2.87

1

2

3 x

(b)

(a)

Graphing y = f ( x )

Practice Problem 5. Use the graph of f ( x ) = 2 x − 4 to sketch the graph of
y = f ( x ) .

Objective 4

Stretching or Compressing
We now look at transformations that distort the shape of a graph, called nonrigid transformations. We consider the relationship of the graphs of y = af ( x ) and y = f ( bx ) to the
graph of y = f ( x ).

Comparing the Graphs of y = f ( x ) and y = af ( x )
EXAMPLE 6

Stretching or Compressing a Graph Vertically

1
x . Sketch the graphs of f , g, and h on the
2
same coordinate plane and describe how the graphs of g and h are related to the graph of f .

Let f ( x ) = x , g ( x ) = 2 x , and h ( x ) =

Solution
1
The graphs of y = x , y = 2 x , and y =
x are sketched in Figure 2.88. Table 2.18
2
gives some typical function values.
TABLE 2.18

y

1
2
0

1
x,
2

x

Figure 2.88 Vertical stretch
and compression

x

f ( x) = x

g( x ) = 2 x

−2

2

4

−1

1

2

  0

0

0

  1

1

2

  2

2

4

h( x ) =

1
1
2
0
1
2
1

1
x
2

264

Chapter 2 Graphs and Functions

The graph of y = 2 x is the graph of y = x vertically stretched (expanded) by multiplying each of its y-coordinates by 2. It is twice as high as the graph of x at every real
number x. The result is a taller V-shaped curve. See the red graph in Figure 2.88.
1
The graph y =
x is the graph of y = x vertically compressed (shrunk) by mul2
1
tiplying each of its y-coordinates by . It is half as high as the graph of x at every real
2
number x. The result is a flatter V-shaped curve. See the green graph in Figure 2.88.
Practice Problem 6. Let f ( x ) = x and g ( x ) = 2 x . Sketch the graphs of f and g on
the same coordinate plane and describe how the graph of g is related to the graph of f .
Vertical Stretching or Compressing
The graph of g ( x ) = af ( x ) is obtained from the graph of y = f ( x ) by multiplying the y-coordinate of each point on the graph of y = f ( x ) by a and leaving the
x-coordinate unchanged. The result (see Figure 2.89) is as follows:
1. A vertical stretch away from the x-axis if a > 1
2. A vertical compression toward the x-axis if 0 < a < 1
If a < 0, first graph y = a f ( x ) by stretching or compressing the graph of
y = f ( x ) vertically. Then reflect the resulting graph about the x-axis.
So if ( x, y ) is a point on the graph of f , then the point ( x, ay ) is on the graph of g.
With both vertical stretching and compressing, the x-intercepts remain the
same but the y-intercept may change.

(x, ay)

y

y

(x, y)
(x, y)
y 5 af(x)
y 5 f (x)

x

y 5 af(x)

y 5 f (x)

a . 1 : stretch vertically

Figure 2.89

(x, ay)

x

0 , a , 1 : compress vertically

Vertical stretch or compression

Comparing the Graphs of y = f ( x ) and y = f ( bx ) Given a function

y = f ( x ), we explore the effect of the constant b in graphing the function y = f ( bx ).
Consider the graphs of y = f ( x ) and y = f ( 2 x ) in Figure 2.90(a). Multiplying the
independent variable x by 2 compresses the graph y = f ( x ) horizontally toward the
y-axis. Because the value 2 x is twice the value of x, a point on the x-axis will be only
half as far from the origin when y = f ( 2 x ) has the same y value as y = f ( x ). See
Figure 2.90(a).
1
Now consider the graphs of y = f ( x ) and y = f x in Figure 2.90(b). Multiplying
2
1
the independent variable x by stretches the graph of y = f ( x ) horizontally away from
2
1
the y-axis. The value x is half the value of x so that a point on the x-axis will be twice
2
1
as far from the origin for y = f x to have the same y-value as in y = f ( x ). See
2
Figure 2.90(b).

( )

( )

Section 2.7 Transformations of Functions
y

SIDE NOTE
Notice that replacing the
variable x with x ± c, or bx in
y = f ( x ) results in a horizontal
change in the graphs. However,
replacing the y value in
y = f ( x ) by f ( x ) ± d , or
af ( x ), results in a vertical change
in the graph of y = f ( x ).

y

y 5 f(2x)

y 5 f(1 x)

x

y 5 f(x)

2

y 5 f(x)

( 1 x, y)

(

2

Figure 2.90
y 5 f (x)

(x, y)

)

( )

( 12 2 x ) = f ( x )
[

]

Horizontal stretch or compression

Let b > 0. The graph of g ( x ) = f ( bx ) is obtained from the graph of y = f ( x )
1
by multiplying the x-coordinate of each point on the graph of y = f ( x ) by
b
and leaving the y-coordinate unchanged. The result (see Figure 2.91) is as follows:

x

O

(b) f

(2x, y)

Horizontal Stretching or Compressing

y 5 f (bx)

1 x, y
b

(x, y)

x

(x, y)

1
( a ) f 2  x  = f ( x )
2 
y

265

1. A horizontal stretch away from the y-axis if 0 < b < 1
2. A horizontal compression toward the y-axis if b > 1
If b < 0, first graph f ( b x ) by stretching or compressing the graph of y = f ( x )
horizontally. Then reflect the graph of y = f ( b x ) about the y-axis.
1
x, y is on the
If ( x, y ) is a point on the graph of y = f ( x ), then the point
b
graph of g ( x ) = f ( bx ).

0 , b , 1 : stretch horizontally
y

(

y 5 f (bx)

With both horizontal stretching and compressing, the y-intercept remains
the same but the x-intercepts may be affected.

y 5 f (x)

1 x, y
b

(x, y)

x

O

EXAMPLE 7

Stretching or Compressing a Function Horizontally

The graph of the function y = f ( x ) whose equation is not given is shown in Figure 2.92.
Sketch the following graphs.
1
d. f
x    b. f ( 2 x )   c. f ( −2 x )
2

( )

b . 1 : compress horizontally

Figure 2.91 Horizontal stretch
and compression

Solution
Note that the domain of f is [ −2, 2 ] and its range is [ −1, 3 ].
1
a. To graph y = f x , we stretch the graph of y = f ( x ) horizontally by a factor of 2.
2
In other words, we transform each point ( x, y ) in Figure 2.92 to the point ( 2 x, y ).
The x-intercept 2 changes to 4, but the y-intercept is the same. See Figure 2.93(a).

( )

y
(1, 3)

1
O

y

y
1 (2, 0)

)

x

Figure 2.92

1
,3
2

(2, 3)
1x
2

1
O

1

y
1
,3
2

1
(4, 0) x

O

1
(1, 0)

x

(21, 0) O

1

2

3

4 x

Domain: [24, 4]; range: [21, 3]

Domain: [21, 1]; range: [21, 3]

Domain: [21, 1]; range: [21, 3]

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 2.93

266

Chapter 2 Graphs and Functions

1
b. To graph y = f ( 2 x ), we compress the graph of y = f ( x ) horizontally by a factor of .
2
1
Therefore, we transform each point ( x, y ) in Figure 2.92 to x, y . The x-intercept
2
2 changes to 1, but the y-intercept is the same. See Figure 2.93(b).
c. To graph y = f ( −2 x ), we reflect the graph of y = f ( 2 x ) in Figure 2.93(b)
about the y-axis. So we transform each point ( x, y ) in Figure 2.93(b) to the
point ( −x, y ). The x-intercept 1 changes to −1, but the y-intercept is the same.
See Figure 2.93(c).

(

y
3

(0, 3)

(2, 3)

2
1
(22, 0)
22

21

0

1

2
(1, 0)

Objective 5

x

)

Practice Problem 7. The graph of a function y = f ( x ) is given in the margin. Sketch
the graphs of the following functions.
1
a. f
x    b.    f ( 2 x )
2

( )

Multiple Transformations in Sequence
When graphing requires more than one transformation of a basic function, it is helpful to
perform transformations in the following order:
1. Horizontal shift   2. Stretch or Compression   3. Reflection   4. Vertical shift
Below we present one possible order of applying transformations to the graph of y = f ( x ).
Here we assume the numbers a, b, c, and d are positive.
Graph
y = ±af ( ±bx ± c ) ± d
Case I
Positive leading coefficient, a
y = a f ( bx ± c ) ± d
Case II
Negative leading coefficient, −a
y = −a f ( bx ± c ) ± d
Case III
y = af ( −b x ± c ) ± d
Negative coefficient for x, −b
Case IV
y = −a f ( −b x ± c ) ± d Negative coefficients, −a, and −b
Step 0
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3

Identify the basic graph.
y = f (x)
Horizontal shift
y = f ( x ± c)
Horizontal stretch or compression
y = f ( bx ± c )
Vertical stretch or compression
y = a f ( bx ± c )
Reflections
Case I none
y = af ( bx ± c )
Case II about the x-axis
y = −af ( bx ± c )
Case III about the y-axis
y = af ( −bx ± c )
First graph y = af ( bx ± c ), replace x by −x and reflect this graph in the
y-axis. Note b ( −x ) = −bx .

Step 4

Case IV about both the x-axis
and the y-axis
y = −af ( −bx ± c )
First graph y = −af ( bx ± c ), replace x by −x and reflect this graph in the
y-axis. Note b ( −x ) = −bx .
Vertical shift
y = ±af ( ±bx ± c ) ± d

EXAMPLE 8

Using Multiple Transformations to Graph a Function

Sketch the graph of the function f ( x ) = −2( x − 1 ) 2 + 3.
Solution
Begin with the graph of the basic function g ( x ) = x 2 . Then apply the necessary transformations in a sequence of steps. The result of each step is shown in Figure 2.94. We follow
the point ( 2, 4 ) in Figure 2.94 on page 267 from the graph of y = x 2 .
Step 0

y = x2

Identify a related function whose graph is familiar.
In this case, use y = x 2 . See Figure 2.94(a).

Section 2.7 Transformations of Functions

267

Step 1

y = ( x − 1)2

Replace x with x − 1; shift the graph of y = x 2 ,
1 unit to the right. See Figure 2.94(b).

Step 2

y = 2( x − 1) 2

Multiply by 2; stretch the graph of y = ( x − 1 ) 2
vertically by a factor of 2. See Figure 2.94(c).

Step 3

y = −2( x − 1) 2

Multiply by −1. Reflect the graph of y = 2( x − 1 ) 2
about the x -axis. See Figure 2.94(d).

Step 4

y = −2( x − 1 ) 2 + 3 Add 3. Shift the graph of y = −2( x − 1 ) 2 ,
up 3 units. See Figure 2.94(e).
Horizontal shift
Shift 1
unit right

y

y

6
y5x

2

6

5

5
(2, 4)

4

y 5 (x 2 1)2

2
1
24 23 22 21 0

(3, 4)

4

3

3
2
1

1

2

(a)

4 x

3

24 23 22 21 0

Stretch vertically
by a factor of 2

1

2

4 x

3

(b)

Vertical shift

(3, 8)

8
7

22 21 0
21

1

2

Reflection about x-axis 22

6

3

4

5 x

y 5 22(x 2 1)2

23

1
22 21 0
1

24

y 5 2(x 2 1)2 4

25

25

3

26

26

2

27

1

28
2

3

4 x

(c)

Figure 2.94

2

3

4

5 x

23

24

1

1

22

5

24 23 22 21 0

y 5 22(x 2 1)2 1 3

2

Shift 3 units up

y

y
9

y
3

(3, 28)

(3, 25)

(e)

29
(d)

Multiple transformations

Practice Problem 8. Sketch the graph of the function
f ( x ) = 3 x + 1 − 2.
WARNING

To Graph

Incorrect Sequence

Correct Sequence

y = f ( 2 x − 1)

y = f ( x ) → y = f ( 2x )
→ y = f ( 2 x − 1)

y = f ( x ) → y = f ( x − 1)
→ y = f ( 2 x − 1)

y = f (2 − x)

y = f ( x ) → y = f ( −x )
→ y = f (2 − x)

y = f ( x) → y = f (2 + x)
→ y = f (2 − x)

y = − f ( x − 1) + 3

y = f ( x ) → y = f ( x − 1)
→ y = f ( x − 1) + 3
→ y = − f ( x − 1) + 3

y = f ( x ) → y = f ( x − 1)
→ y = − f ( x − 1)
→ y = − f ( x − 1) + 3

268

Chapter 2 Graphs and Functions

EXAMPLE 9

Using a Sequence of Transformations

Use the graph of y = f ( x ) in Figure 2.95(i) to graph y = −

1 (
f 4 − 2 x ) + 5.
3

Solution
y
y 5 f(x)

y

y
(6, 6)

Graph y = f ( 4 + x )

(2, 3)

O

(4, 0)

Graph y = f ( 4 + 2 x )

(22, 3)

Shift 4 units left.
Subtract 4 from
each x-coordinate.

x

(1, 6)

(2, 6)

Compress horizontally
by a factor of 2. Multiply
x each x-coordinate by 1.
2
￼

O (0, 0)

(i)

(ii)
y

Graph y =

O (0, 0)

x

(iii)

y

1 (
f 4 + 2x )
3

Graph y =
(21, 1)

Compress vertically by
a factor of 1 . Multiply
3
each y-coordinate by 1 .
3

(21, 3)

1 (
f 4 − 2x )
3

(1, 2)

O (0, 0)

(21, 2)
Reflect about the y-axis.
Replace each x-coordinate
with its opposite.

x

(1, 1)
O (0, 0)

(iv)

x

(v)

y

y
1
Graph y = − f ( 4 − 2 x )
3
Reflect about the x-axis.
Replace each y-coordinate
with its opposite.

(0, 0)
O
(21, 22)

x
(1, 21)

1
Graph y = − f ( 4 − 2 x ) + 5
3
Shift 5 units up. Add 5 to each
y-coordinate.

(vi)
y

Figure 2.95

(23, 4)

(25, 0)

x

(21, 0)

(0, 5)
(1, 4)

(21, 3)
O

(vii)

Graph of y = −1 f ( 4 − 2 x ) + 5
3

Practice Problem 9. Use the graph of y = f ( x ) in Figure 2.96 to graph
1
y = f ( 2 x − 1 ) + 3.
2

(3, 22)

Figure 2.96

SUMMARY OF MAIN FACTS
Summary of Transformations of y = f ( x )
To graph

Draw the graph of f and

Vertical shift

Shift the graph of f

Make these changes
to the equation
y = f(x)

Change the
graph
point ( x , y ) to

( for d > 0 )

y = f (x) + d

up d units.

Add d to f ( x ).

( x, y + d )

y = f (x) − d

down d units.

Subtract d from f ( x ).

( x, y − d )

Replace x with x − c.
Replace x with x + c.

( x + c, y )

Horizontal shift

( for c > 0 )

y = f ( x − c)
y = f ( x + c)

x

Shift the graph of f
to the right c units.
to the left c units.

( x − c, y )

Section 2.7 Transformations of Functions

To graph

Reflection about
the x-axis
y = −f (x)
Reflection about
the y-axis
y = f ( −x )
Vertical
stretching or
compressing:
y = af ( x )

Horizontal
stretching or
compressing:
y = f ( bx )

Draw the graph of f and

Make these changes
to the equation
y = f(x)

Change the
graph
point ( x , y ) to

Reflect the graph of f about the x-axis.

Multiply f ( x ) by −1.

( x, − y )

Reflect the graph of f about the y-axis.

Replace x with −x.

( −x, y )

Multiply each y-coordinate of y =
graph of y = f ( x ) is stretched vertically away from the
x-axis if a > 1 and is compressed vertically toward the
x-axis if 0 < a < 1.
If a < 0, sketch the graph of y = a f ( x ), then reflect
it about the x-axis.
1
Multiply each x-coordinate of y = f ( x ) by .
b
The graph of y = f ( x ) is stretched away from the y-axis if
0 < b < 1 and is compressed toward the y-axis if b > 1.
If b < 0, sketch the graph of y = f ( b x ), then reflect
it about the y-axis.

Multiply f ( x ) by a.

( x, ay )

Replace x with bx.

( bx , y )

f ( x ) by a. The

269

Summary for Combining Transformations in Sequence
To graph y = af ( bx + c ) + d, with b > 0 and c > 0
• Starting with the graph of y = f ( x ), perform the indicated sequence of transformations. Here is one possible sequence:
Horizontal shift to the left (c > 0)

Horizontal stretch
or compress

y

y

y
y 5 f (bx 1 c)

y 5 f (x)

O

x

x

O

x

O
y 5 f ( x1c)

Here b > 1; the graph
compresses horizontally
toward the y-axis.
Vertical stretch or compress

y

Vertical shift

y

y
y 5 af (bx 1 c) 1 d

y 5 |a| f (b x 1 c )
O

x
Reflect

Here | a| > 1; the graph
stretches vertically.

O

x

O

y 5 af (b x 1 c)

Here a < 0; the graph reflects
about the x-axis.

Here d > 0; the graph shifts up.

Note: If c < 0, then the horizontal shift should be |c| units to the right, if b < 0, graph y 5 af(|b|x 1 c) 1 d,
but reflect this graph about the y-axis before completing the last step, the vertical shift, d.

x

270

2.7

Chapter 2 Graphs and Functions

Exercises

Videos for
select exercises

Concepts and Vocabulary
1. The graph of y = f ( x ) − 3 is found by vertically shifting
the graph of y = f ( x ), 3 units
.
2. The graph of y = f ( x + 5 ) is found by horizontally shifting the graph of y = f ( x ), 5 units to the
.
3. The graph of y = f ( bx ) is a horizontal compression of the
graph of y = f ( x ) if b
.
4. The graph of y = f ( −x ) is found by reflecting the graph of
y = f ( x ) about the
.
5. True or False. The graphs of y = f ( x ) and y = f ( −x )
cannot be the same.

21. f ( x ) = 3 x
a. g ( x ) = 3 x + 1

b. h ( x ) = 3 x + 1

3

22. f ( x ) = x
a. g ( x ) = 2 3 1 − x + 4

b. h ( x ) = − 3 x − 1 + 3

In Exercises 23–34, match each function with its graph (a)–(l).
23. y = − x + 1
24. y = − −x
1
25. y = x 2
26. y =
x
2
27. y = x + 1
28. y = 2 x − 3

6. True or False. The graphs of y = f ( x ) and y = f ( x ) + 1
cannot be the same.

29. y = 1 − 2 x
( x − 1) 2

32. y = −x 2 + 3

7. True or False. You get the same graph by shifting the graph
of y = x 2 up 2 units, reflecting the shifted graph about the
x-axis or reflecting the graph of y = x 2 about the x-axis, and
then shifting the reflected graph up 2 units.

33. y = −2( x − 3) 2 − 1

34. y = 3 − 1 − x

8. True or False. Combining horizontal and vertical shifts of a
graph preserves the shape of the original graph.

0

31. y =

30. y = − x − 1 + 1

y

y

1

1
1

2

0

x

1

2

3

x

5

7

9 x

1

2

x

1

2

Building Skills
In Exercises 9–22, describe the transformations that produce
the graphs of g and h from the graph of f.
9. f ( x ) = x
a. g ( x ) = x + 2
b. h ( x ) = x − 1
10. f ( x ) = x
a. g ( x ) = x + 1
11. f ( x ) = x 2
a. g ( x ) = ( x + 1 ) 2
1
12. f ( x ) =
x
1
a. g ( x ) =
x+2

y
3

y
1

b. h ( x ) = x − 2

1

0

1

x

b. h ( x ) =

1
x−3

b. h ( x ) =

14. f ( x ) = x 2
a. g ( x ) = −x 2

b. h ( x ) = (−x ) 2

15. f ( x ) = x
a. g ( x ) = − x

b. h ( x ) = −x

x −1 + 3

21 0 1

3

23

b. h ( x ) = ( x − 2 ) 2

13. f ( x ) = x
a. g ( x ) = x + 1 − 2

16. f ( x ) = x
a. g ( x ) = 2 x
1
17. f ( x ) =
x
2
a. g ( x ) =
x
18. f ( x ) = x 3
a. g ( x ) = ( x − 2 )3 + 1

(b)

(a)

27
(c)

(d)

y

y

1

4

0

1

2

x

3
2
1
0

b. h ( x ) =

b. h ( x ) =

2x

1
2x

b. h ( x ) = −( x + 1 )3 + 2

19. f ( x ) = x
a. g ( x ) = − x + 1

b. h ( x ) =

20. f ( x ) =  x 
a. g ( x ) =  x − 1 + 2

b. h ( x ) = 3 x  − 1

−x + 1

(e)

(f)

y

y

2

2

1

1
1
2

0
(g)

1

2

x

0
(h)

x

Section 2.7 Transformations of Functions
y

y

2

4

In Exercises 75–82, graph each function by starting with a
function from the library of functions and then combining
shifting, compressing, stretching, and/or reflecting techniques.
1
75. f ( x ) = 2( x + 1 ) 2 − 1
76. f ( x ) = ( x + 1 ) 2 + 2
3
1
2
77. f ( x ) = 2 − ( x − 3 )
78. f ( x ) = 1 − 3( x − 3 ) 2
2
79. f ( x ) = 2 x + 1 − 3
80. f ( x ) = 2 x − 2 + 1

3
1

2
1

0

1

2

0

x

3

(i)

1

271

x

81. f ( x ) = −2 x − 1 + 2

(j)

82. f ( x ) = −

1
3− x −1
2

y

y

In Exercises 83–94, write an equation for a function whose
graph fits the given description.

1

2

83. The graph of f ( x ) = x 3 is shifted 2 units up.

1

2

3

84. The graph of f ( x ) =

x

85. The graph of f ( x ) = x is reflected about the x-axis.

1

0

  

(k)

86. f ( x ) =

1

2

3

(l)

In Exercises 35–62, graph each function by starting with a
function from the library of functions and then using the
techniques of shifting, compressing, stretching, and/or
reflecting.
35. f ( x ) = x 2 − 2
36. f ( x ) = x 2 + 3
37. g ( x ) =

x +1

38. g ( x ) =

x −4

39. f ( x ) = x + 2

40. f ( x ) = x − 1

41. f ( x ) = x 3 + 2
1
43. f ( x ) = + 1
x
45. f ( x ) = ( x − 3 )3

42. f ( x ) = x 3 − 1
1
44. f ( x ) = − 2
x
46. f ( x ) = ( x + 2 )3

47. f ( x ) =

48. f ( x ) =

x −1

49. h ( x ) = x + 1
51. f ( x ) = ( x + 1 )
1
53. f ( x ) =
x−3
55. f ( x ) = −x

x+2

50. h ( x ) = x − 2
3

57. f ( x ) = −x 2
59. f ( x ) = 2 x 2
61. f ( x ) = 2 x

52. f ( x ) = ( x − 3 )3
1
54. f ( x ) =
x+2
56. f ( x ) = − x
58. f ( x ) = −x 3
1
60. f ( x ) = x 2
3
1
62. f ( x ) = x
3

x

x is reflected about the y-axis.

87. The graph of f ( x ) = x 2 is shifted 3 units right and then
2 units up.
88. The graph of f ( x ) = x 2 is shifted 2 units left and then
reflected about the x-axis.
89. The graph of f ( x ) = x is shifted 3 units left, reflected about
the x-axis, and then shifted 2 units down.
90. The graph of f ( x ) = x is shifted 2 units down, reflected
about the x-axis, and then compressed vertically by a factor
1
of .
2
91. The graph of f ( x ) = x 3 is shifted 4 units left, stretched
vertically by a factor of 3, reflected about the y-axis, and
then shifted 2 units up.
92. The graph of f ( x ) = x 3 is reflected about the x-axis,
shifted 1 unit up, shifted 1 unit left, and then reflected about
the y-axis.
93. The graph of f ( x ) = x is shifted 4 units right, compressed
horizontally by a factor of 2, reflected about the x-axis, and
then shifted 3 units down.
94. The graph of f ( x ) = x is shifted 2 units right, reflected
about the y-axis, stretched horizontally by a factor of 2, and
then shifted 3 units down.
In Exercises 95–108, graph the function y = g( x ), given the
following graph of y = f ( x ) .
y
6

63. f ( x ) = ( x − 2 ) 2 + 1

64. f ( x ) = ( x − 3 ) 2 − 5

65. f ( x ) = 5 − ( x − 3 ) 2

66. f ( x ) = 2 − ( x + 1 ) 2

(4, 5)

4

In Exercises 63–74, graph each function by starting with a
function from the library of functions and then combining
shifting and reflecting techniques.

2
0

67. f ( x ) =

x+1−3

68. f ( x ) =

69. f ( x ) =

1− x + 2

70. f ( x ) = − x + 2 − 3

95. g ( x ) = f ( x ) − 1

72. f ( x ) = − x + 3 + 1
1
74. f ( x ) = 2 −
x+2

g( x ) = − f ( x )

71. f ( x ) = x − 1 − 2
1
73. f ( x ) =
+3
x −1

x is shifted 3 units left.

2

4

x

x−2 +1
97.

99. g ( x ) = f ( 2 x )

96. g ( x ) = f ( x ) + 3
98. g ( x ) = f ( −x )
1
100. g ( x ) = f
x
2

( )

272

Chapter 2 Graphs and Functions

101. g ( x ) = f ( x + 1 )

105. g ( x ) = f ( x − 1 ) + 2

102. g ( x ) = f ( x − 2 )
1 ( )
104. g ( x ) =
f x
2
106. g ( x ) = − f ( −2 x ) − 1

107. g ( x ) = f ( 1 − 2 x )

108. g ( x ) = f ( 3 − 2 x )

103. g ( x ) = 2 f ( x )

In Exercises 109–118, graph (a) y = g( x ) and (b) y = g( x ) ,
given the following graph of y = f ( x ) .
y
6
(5, 4)
2
0

(1, 2)

1

124. Poiseuille’s Law. For an artery of radius R, the velocity υ
(in mm/min) of blood flow at a distance r from the center
of the artery is given by
υ = c ( R 2 − r 2 ), 0 ≤ r ≤ R,
where c is a constant.
In an artery for Tara, c = 1000 and R = 3 mm. Find the
velocity of blood flow in this artery at
a. the center of the artery.
b. the inner linings of the artery.
c. midway between the center and the inner
linings.
125. Poiseuille’s Law. For an artery of radius R, the velocity v
(in mm/min) of blood flow at a distance r from the center
of the artery is given by

6 x

υ = c ( R 2 − r 2 ), 0 ≤ r ≤ R,
where c is a constant.

109. g ( x ) = f ( x ) + 1
1
111. g ( x ) = f x
2
113. g ( x ) = f ( x − 1 )

( )

110. g ( x ) = −2 f ( x )
112. g ( x ) = f ( −2 x )
114. g ( x ) = f ( 2 − x )

115. g ( x ) = −2 f ( x + 1 ) + 3

In an artery for Tara’s collie, c = 750 and R = 2 mm.
Find the velocity of blood flow in this artery at
a. the center of the artery.
b. the inner linings of the artery.
c. midway between the center and the inner
linings.
126. Demand. The weekly demand for paper hats produced by
Mythical Manufacturers is given by

116. g ( x ) = − f ( −x + 1 ) − 2

x ( p ) = 109,561 − ( p + 1) 2 ,

Applying the Concepts
In Exercises 119–122, let f be the function that associates the
employee number x of each employee of the ABC Corporation
with his or her annual salary f ( x ) in dollars.
119. Across-the-board raise. Each employee was awarded an
across-the-board raise of $800 per year. Write a function
g ( x ) to describe the new salary.
120. Percentage raise. Suppose each employee was awarded
a 5% raise. Write a function h ( x ) to describe the new
salary.
121. Across-the-board and percentage raises. Suppose each
employee was awarded a $500 across-the-board raise and an
additional 2% of his or her increased salary. Write a function
p( x ) to describe the new salary.
122. Across-the-board percentage raise. Suppose the
employees making $30,000 or more received a 2%
raise, while those making less than $30,000 received a
10% raise. Write a piecewise function to describe these
new salaries.
123. Health plan. The ABC Corporation pays for its employees’
health insurance at an annual cost (in dollars) given by
C ( x ) = 5,000 + 10

x − 1,

where x is the number of employees covered.
a. Use transformations of the graph of y = x to sketch
the graph of y = C ( x ).
b. Assuming that the company has 400 employees, find its
annual outlay for the health coverage.

where x represents the number of hats that can be sold at a
price of p cents each.
a. Use transformations on the graph of y = p 2 to sketch
the graph of y = x ( p ).
b. Find the price at which 69,160 hats can be sold.
c. Find the price at which no hats can be sold.
127. Revenue. The weekly demand for cashmere sweaters
produced by Wool Shop Inc. is x ( p ) = −3 p + 600. The
revenue is given by R ( p ) = −3 p 2 + 600 p. Describe how
to sketch the graph of y = R ( p ) by applying transformations to the graph of y = p 2 . [Hint: First, write R ( p ) in
the form −3( p − h) 2 + k . ]
128. Daylight. At 60° north latitude, the graph of y = f ( t )
gives the number of hours of daylight. (On the t-axis, note
that 1 = January and 12 = December. )

y
15
Daylight

117. g ( x ) = 2 f ( 1 − 2 x ) − 3
118. g ( x ) = − f ( −2 −2 x ) + 1

(6, 14)
(3, 12)

10

(1, 10.3)

0

3

(9, 12)
(12, 10)

6

9

12

t

Month

Sketch the graph of y = f ( t ) − 12.
129. Use the graph of y = f ( t ) of Exercise 128 to sketch the
graph of y = 24 − f ( t ). Interpret the result.

Section 2.7 Transformations of Functions

273

Beyond the Basics

Critical Thinking / Discussion / Writing

In Exercises 130 and 131, the graphs of y = f ( x ) and
y = g( x ) are given. Find an equation for g( x ) if the graph of g
is obtained from the graph of f by a sequence of transformations.

146. The x-intercepts of the function f are −1, 0, and 2. Find
the corresponding x-intercepts for the following functions.

y

130.

y

y 5 f(x)

(1, 0)

x

x
(23, 22)

131.

y 5 g(x)

y

y

(25, 4)

(3, 4)

a. y = f ( x ) + 2
c. y = − f ( x )

b. y = f ( x ) − 2
d. y = f ( −x )
1 ( )
e. y = 2 f ( x )
f. y =
f x
2
148. Let a function f have domain [ −1, 3 ] and range [ −2, 1 ].
Find the corresponding domain and range for the following
functions.
a. y = f ( x + 2 )
c. y = − f ( x )

(23, 0)
(1, 0)

x

(1, 0) x

(23, 0)

y 5 f (x)

(21, 22)

(21, 22)

y 5 g(x)

In Exercises 132–139, by completing the square on each
quadratic expression, use transformations on y = x 2 to
sketch the graph of y = f ( x ) .
132. f ( x ) = x 2 + 4 x
[Hint: x 2 + 4 x = ( x 2 + 4 x + 4 ) − 4 = ( x + 2 ) 2 − 4.]
133. f ( x ) = x 2 − 6 x
134. f ( x ) = −x 2 + 2 x
135. f ( x ) = −x 2 − 2 x
137. f ( x ) =

b. y = f ( x − 2 )
d. y = f ( −x )
1
e. y = f ( 2 x )
f. y = f x
2
147. The y-intercept of the function f is 2. Find the corresponding y-intercepts for the following functions.

( )

(4, 2)

(0, 0)

a. y = f ( x + 2 )
c. y = − f ( x )

2x 2

136. f ( x ) = 2 x 2 − 4 x

+ 6 x + 3.5

138. f ( x ) = −2 x 2 − 8 x + 3
139. f ( x ) = −2 x 2 + 2 x − 1
In Exercises 140–145, sketch the graph of each function.
140. y = 2 x + 3
141. y =  x 
1
2
142. y = 4 − x
143. y =
x
144. y =
x
145. y =  x 

GETTING READY

b. y = f ( x ) − 2
d. y = f ( −x )
1 ( )
e. y = 2 f ( x )
f. y =
f x
2
149. Let a function f have a relative maximum at x = 1 and a
relative minimum at x = 2 . Find the corresponding
relative maxima and minima for the following functions.
a. y = f ( x + 2 )
c. y = − f ( x )
e. y = 2 f ( x )

Active Learning

b. y = f ( x ) − 2
d. y = f ( −x )
1
f. y = f ( x )
2

150. Explorations: Horizontal and Vertical
Shifting of the Graph of f ( x ). Open the
GeoGebra applet using the attached QR code or
bitly link.
a. Choose a function from the drop-down menu next to
“ f ( x ) = ”. Drag the slider for c and notice the changes
to the graph of f ( x + c ) + k . Note that the equation for
y = f ( x ), just below the sliders, changes to show the
effect that c has on the equation.
b. For the chosen function, drag the slider for k and notice
the changes to the graph of f ( x + c ) + k. Note that the
equation for y = f ( x ), just below the sliders, changes
to show the effect that k has on the equation.

for the Next Section

REVIEW CONCEPTS
Domain of a function (Section 2.4, page 210)
Rational inequalities (Section 1.6, page 149)
REVIEW SKILLS
Adding and subtracting polynomials
(Section P.3, page 31)
In Exercises GR1–GR6, perform the indicated operations.
GR1. ( 5 x 2 + 5 x + 7 ) + ( x 2 + 9 x − 4 )
GR2. ( x 2 + 2 x ) + ( 6 x 3 − 2 x + 5 )
GR3. ( 5 x 2 + 6 x − 2 ) − ( 3 x 2 − 9 x + 1 )
GR4. ( x 3 + 2 ) − ( 2 x 3 + 5 x − 3 )
GR5. ( x − 2 )( x 2 + 2 x + 4 )
GR6. ( x 2 + x + 1 )( x 2 − x + 1 )

Finding the domain of a function (Section 2.4, page 215)
In Exercises GR7–GR10, find the domain of each function.
2x − 3
GR7. f ( x ) = 2
x − 5x + 6
x−2
GR8. f ( x ) = 2
x −4
1
GR9. f ( x ) = 2 x − 3
GR10. f ( x ) =
5 − 2x
Solving rational inequalities (Section 1.6, page 149)
In Exercises GR11–GR14, solve the given inequality.
−3
x −1
GR11.
< 0
GR12.
> 0
(1 − x ) 2
x − 10
( x − 3 )( x − 1 )
−2 x + 8
GR13.
≤ 0
GR14.
≥ 0
( x − 5 )( x + 1 )
x2 + 1

274

Chapter 2 Graphs and Functions

2.8

Combining Functions;
Composite Functions
Objectives

Videos for
this Section

1

Define basic operations on functions.

2

Form composite functions.

3

Find the domain of a composite function.

4

Decompose a function.

5

Apply composition to practical problems.

Ruth Gonzalez
born in Houston Texas to Mexican
parents, is the first U.S.-born
Hispanic woman known to earn a
doctorate in mathematics. After
receiving her Ph.D from Rice
University in 1986, she became a
geophysical mathematician for
ExxonMobile. As a geophysical
mathematician for Exxon, she
was involved in the research and
development of seismic
algorithms that are used in the
exploration and production of
hydrocarbon reservoirs (oil and
gas). She helped develop
technology that allows specialists
to determine where to drill for oil
and gas.

Objective1

BP Oil Spill
The Deepwater Horizon was a
floating drilling rig that could
operate in waters up to 10,000
feet deep. British Petroleum (BP)
was the operator and principal
developer of the exploratory well
situated in the Gulf of Mexico
about 41 miles off the Louisiana
coast. On April 20, 2010, at
approximately 9:45 p.m., highpressure methane gas from the
well ignited and exploded,
engulfing the platform of the rig.
At the time, 126 crew members
were on board. Of these, 11
workers were never found despite
extensive search operations and are believed to have died in the explosion.
The total estimated volume of oil leaked was approximately 5 million barrels, making it the
largest accidental oil spill in history. The spill directly impacted 68,000 square miles (about the size
of Oklahoma). By June 2010, oil had washed up on 1074 miles of the coasts of Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama, and Florida.
On June 16, 2010, BP announced a $20 billion fund to settle claims arising from the disaster.
The fund was to be used only for natural resource restoration and compensation for individual
and business claimants. In July, 2013, BP and its partners in the oil well, Transocean and Halliburton, went on trial to determine payouts and fines under the Clean Water Act and the Natural
Resources Damages Assessment. In July, 2015, BP said its total pre-tax charge for the spill stood
at 53.8 billion.
In Example 9, we calculate the area covered by an oil spill.

Combining Functions
Just as numbers can be added, subtracted, multiplied, and divided to produce new numbers,
so too functions can be added, subtracted, multiplied, and divided to produce other
functions. To add, subtract, multiply, or divide functions, we simply add, subtract, multiply,
or divide their output values.

Section 2.8 Combining Functions; Composite Functions

275

For example, if f ( x ) = x 2 − 2 x + 4 and g ( x ) = x + 2, then
f ( x ) + g ( x ) = ( x 2 − 2 x + 4 ) + ( x + 2 ) = x 2 − x + 6.
This new function y = x 2 − x + 6 is called the sum function f + g.
Sum, Difference, Product, and Quotient of Functions
Let f and g be two functions. The sum f + g, the difference f − g, the product fg,
f
and the quotient are functions defined as follows:
g
• Sum		

( f + g )( x ) =

f ( x ) + g( x )

• Difference

( f − g )( x ) =

f ( x ) − g( x )

• Product

fg ( x ) = f ( x ) ⋅ g ( x ); also written as ( fg )( x )

f
f
f (x)
(x) =
, provided that g ( x ) ≠ 0; also written as  ( x )
g
g
g( x )
The domain of each of the new functions consists of those values of x that are comf
mon to the domains of f and g, except that for all x for which g ( x ) = 0 must be
g
excluded.
• Quotient

EXAMPLE 1

Combining Functions

Let f ( x ) = x 2 − 6 x + 8 and g ( x ) = x − 2. Find each of the following functions or
function values.
f
a. ( f − g )( 4 )		
b.  ( 3 )
g
c. ( f + g )( x )		
d. ( f − g )( x )
f
e. ( fg )( x )		 f.  ( x )
g
Solution
a.

f ( 4 ) = 4 2 − 6( 4 ) + 8 = 0

Replace x with 4 in f ( x ).

g( 4 ) = 4 − 2 = 2

Replace x with 4 in g ( x ).

( f − g )( 4 ) =

f ( 4 ) − g( 4 )

= 0 − 2 = −2
b.

Definition of difference
Replace f ( 4 ) with 0, g ( 4 ) with 2.

f ( 3 ) = 3 2 − 6( 3 ) + 8 = −1

Replace x with 3 in f ( x ).

g( 3 ) = 3 − 2 = 1

Replace x with 3 in g ( x ).

( )
 f 
 ( 3 ) = f 3 = −1 = −1
g
1
g( 3 )

Replace f ( 3 ) with −1, g ( 3 ) with 1.

c. ( f + g )( x ) = f ( x ) + g ( x )
= ( x 2 − 6x + 8 ) + ( x − 2 )
= x 2 − 5x + 6
d. ( f − g )( x ) = f ( x ) − g ( x )
= ( x 2 − 6x + 8 ) + ( x − 2 )
x 2 − 7 x + 10

e.

( fg )( x ) =

=
f ( x ) ⋅ g( x )

Definition of sum
Add f ( x ) and g ( x ).
Combine like terms.
Definition of difference
Subtract g ( x ) from f ( x ).
Combine like terms.
Definition of product

= ( x 2 − 6 x + 8 )( x − 2 )

Multiply f ( x ) and g ( x ).

= x 2 ( x − 2 ) − 6 x ( x − 2 ) + 8( x − 2 )

Distributive property

= x 3 − 2 x 2 − 6 x 2 + 12 x + 8 x − 16

Distributive property

=

x 3 − 8 x 2 + 20 x − 16

Combine like terms.

276

Chapter 2 Graphs and Functions

f
f (x)
, g( x ) ≠ 0
f.  ( x ) =
g
g( x )

Definition of quotient

x 2 − 6x + 8
, x−2 ≠ 0
x−2
( x − 2 )( x − 4 )
=
, x ≠ 2
x−2
= x − 4, x ≠ 2
=

Replace f ( x ) with x 2 − 6 x + 8,
g ( x ) with x − 2.
Factor the numerator.

Because f and g are polynomials, the domain of both f and g is the set of all real
numbers, or in interval notation, ( −∞, ∞ ). So the domain for f + g, f − g, and fg is
f
f
( −∞, ∞ ) . However, for
, we must exclude 2 because g(2) = 0. The domain for is
g
g
the set of all real numbers x, x ≠ 2, or in interval notation, ( −∞, 2 ) ∪ ( 2, ∞ ).
Practice Problem 1. Let f ( x ) = 3 x − 1 and g ( x ) = x 2 + 2. Find ( f + g) ( x ),
f
( f − g )( x ), ( fg )( x ), and  ( x ).
 g 
WARNING

When rewriting a function such as

 f 
(
)(
)
 ( x ) = x − 2 x − 4 , x ≠ 2,
g
x−2
by dividing out the common factor, remember to specify “x ≠ 2.”
We identify the domain before we simplify and write

 f 
 ( x ) = x − 4, x ≠ 2.
g

EXAMPLE 2

Finding the Domain

Let f ( x ) =

x + 2 and g ( x ) =

5 − x . Find the domain of f + g, f − g, fg, and

Solution
Recall (see page 60) that u is defined only if u ≥ 0.
So f ( x ) = x + 2 is defined if x + 2 ≥ 0 or x ≥ −2.
The domain of f = D1 = [ −2, ∞ ).
Similarly, g ( x ) =

f
.
g

Solve for x.
Interval notation

5 − x is defined only if 5 − x ≥ 0
or

5 ≥ x

Solve for x.

or

x ≤ 5.

Rewrite.

The domain of g = D 2 = ( −∞, 5 ].
Interval notation
To find the required domains, we first find D1 ∩ D 2 from the graphs of D1 and D 2. See
Figure 2.97.
D1 :
22
D2 :
5
D1 ù D2 :
22

Figure 2.97

5

Section 2.8 Combining Functions; Composite Functions

277

f
, we
g
5 − x = 0. Solving this

The domain of f + g, f − g, and fg is D1 ∩ D 2 = [ −2, 5 ]. For the domain of
must exclude from D1 ∩ D 2 those numbers where g ( x ) =
equation for x, we have x = 5.
f
So the domain of is [ −2, 5 ).
g
Practice Problem 2. Let f ( x ) =
g
f
fg, , and .
g
f

Objective 2

x − 1 and g ( x ) =

3 − x . Find the domain of

Composition of Functions
There is yet another way to construct a new function from two functions. Figure 2.98
shows what happens when you apply one function g ( x ) = x 2 − 1 to an input (domain)
value, x, and then apply a second function f ( x ) = x to the output value, g ( x ), from
the first function. In this case, the output from the first function becomes the input for the
second function.
g(x) 5 x2 2 1

f(x) 5 Ïx
First
output
x2 2 1

First
x
input

Figure 2.98

Second
input
x2 2 1

Second
output
Ïx2 2 1

Composition of functions

Composition of Functions
If f and g are two functions, the composition of the function f with the function g is
written as f  g and is defined by the equation
( f  g )( x ) =

f ( g ( x ) ).

We read ( f  g )( x ) as “ f composed with g of x” and f ( g ( x ) ) as “ f of g of x.” The
domain of f  g consists of those values x in the domain of g for which g ( x ) is in the
domain of f.
Figure 2.99 may help clarify the definition of f  g.
f 8g

x
Domain
of f 8 g

Figure 2.99

g

g(x)

f

f(g(x))

g(x) must be in the
domain of f

Composition of the function f with g

Evaluating ( f  g)( x ) By definition,

inner function

( f  g ) ( x ) = f ( g ( x ) ).
outer function
Thus, to evaluate ( f  g) ( x ), we must
(i) evaluate the inner function g at x.
(ii) use the result g ( x ) as the input for the outer function f.

278

Chapter 2 Graphs and Functions

EXAMPLE 3

Evaluating a Composite Function

SIDE NOTE

Let f ( x ) = x 3 and g ( x ) = x + 1. Find each composite function value.

When computing
( f  g)( x ) = f ( g ( x ) ), you
must replace every x in f ( x )
with g ( x ).

a. ( f  g) ( 1 )    b. ( g  f )( 1 )    c. ( f  f )( −1 )
Solution
a. ( f  g )( 1 ) = f ( g ( 1 ) )
= [ g (1) ]

Definition of f  g

3

Replace x with g ( 1 ) in f ( x ) = x 3 .

= 23 = 8

g ( 1 ) = 1 + 1 = 2; simplify.

b. ( g  f )( 1 ) = g ( f ( 1 ) )

Definition of g  f

= f (1) + 1

Replace x with f ( 1 ) in g ( x ) = x + 1.

= 1+1 = 2

f ( 1 ) = 13 + 1; simplify.

c. ( f  f )( −1 ) = f ( f ( −1 ) )
= [ f ( −1) ]

Definition of f  f

3

Replace x with f ( −1) in f ( x ) = x 3 .

= ( −1)3 = −1

f ( −1) = ( −1)3 = −1; simplify.

Practice Problem 3. Let f ( x ) = −5 x and g ( x ) = x 2 + 1. Find each composite
function value.
a. ( f  g) ( 0 )   b. ( g  f )( 0 )
EXAMPLE 4

Finding Composite Functions

Let f ( x ) = 2 x + 1 and g ( x ) = x 2 − 3. Find each composite function.
a. ( f  g) ( x )    b. ( g  f )( x )    c. ( f  f )( x )
Solution
a. ( f  g )( x ) = f ( g ( x ) )

Definition of f  g

= 2g ( x ) + 1

Replace x with g ( x ) in f ( x ) = 2 x + 1.

= 2( x 2 − 3 ) + 1

Replace g ( x ) with x 2 − 3.

= 2x 2 − 5

Simplify.

b. ( g  f )( x ) = g ( f ( x ) )
2

= [ f ( x )] − 3
= ( 2 x + 1)2 − 3
= 4x 2 + 4x + 1 − 3
= 4x 2 + 4x − 2
c. ( f  f )( x ) = f ( f ( x ) )
= 2 f (x) + 1
= 2( 2 x + 1) + 1
= 4x + 3

Definition of g  f
Replace x with f ( x ) in g ( x ) = x 2 − 3.
Replace f ( x ) with 2 x + 1.
( A + B ) 2 = A 2 + 2 AB + B 2
Simplify.
Definition of f  f
Replace x with f ( x ) in f ( x ) = 2 x + 1.
Replace f ( x ) with 2x + 1.
Simplify.

Practice Problem 4. Let f ( x ) = 2 − x and g ( x ) = 2 x 2 + 1. Find each composite
function.
a. ( g  f )( x )    b. ( f  g )( x )    c. ( g  g) ( x )
Parts a and b of Example 4 illustrate that in general, f  g ≠ g  f . In other words, the
composition of functions is not commutative.
WARNING

Note that f ( g ( x ) ) is not f ( x ) ⋅ g ( x ). In f ( g ( x ) ), the output of g is used as an input for f ; in
contrast, in f ( x ) ⋅ g ( x ), the output f ( x ) is multiplied by the output g ( x ).

Section 2.8 Combining Functions; Composite Functions

Objective 3

279

Domain of Composite Functions
Let f and g be two functions. The domain of the composite function f  g consists of those
values of x in the domain of g for which g ( x ) is in the domain of f . So to find the domain
of f  g, we first find the domain of g. Then from the domain of g, we exclude those values
of x for which g ( x ) is not in the domain of f .

PROCEDURE IN ACTION
EXAMPLE 5

Finding the Domain of a Composite Function

Objective

Example

Find the domain of f  g from the defining equations for
f and g.

Find the domain of f  g if

Step 1 Let A be the domain of the inner function g. We
may find A by first finding the values of x for which g is
not defined.

1. g ( x ) =

Step 2 Let B be the set of values of x for which g ( x ) is
in the domain of f. As before, we may do this by finding
the values of x for which g ( x ) is not in the domain of f.

f (x) =

2
5
and g ( x ) =
.
x−3
x+1

5
is not defined if the denominator
x+1
x + 1 = 0 , or x = −1. So A = { x x ≠ −1 }, or
A = ( −∞, −1) ∪ ( −1, ∞ ).
2
2. f ( g ( x ) ) =
, so f ( g ( x ) ) is not defined if
(
g x) − 3
the denominator
g ( x ) − 3 = 0.
5
−3 = 0
x+1
5 − 3( x + 1 ) = 0

5
.
x+1
Multiply by ( x + 1 ).

Replace g ( x ) with

5 − 3x − 3 = 0
Simplify.
2
Solve for x.
x =
3
2
2
2
B = xx ≠
, or B = −∞,
∪ , ∞
3
3
3

{

Step 3 The domain of f  g is A ∩ B. The set A ∩ B
is the values of x that are in the domain of g and for
which g ( x ) is in the domain of f.

3.

}

(

) (

)

A:
21
B:
2
3

A ù B:
2
3

21

(

) (

)

2
2
A ∩ B = ( −∞, − 1 ) ∪ −1,
∪ , ∞ is the
3
3
domain of f  g.
Practice Problem 5. Let f ( x ) =
f  g.

x + 1 and g ( x ) =

2
. Find the domain of
x−3

Sometimes we can determine the domain of f  g by just examining the equation for f ( g ( x ) ).
EXAMPLE 6
Let f ( x ) =

Finding the Domain of Composite Functions

1
and g ( x ) = 3 x − 12. Find the domain of f  g.
x

280

Chapter 2 Graphs and Functions

SIDE NOTE
If the function f  g can be simplified, determine the domain
before simplifying. For example,
if f ( x ) = x 2 and g ( x ) = x ,

Solution
1
1
Because f ( g ( x ) ) =
=
we see f ( g ( x ) ) is not defined if the denominator
(x)
g
3
x
−
12
is zero.
3 x − 12 = 0

Set g ( x ) = 0.

( f  g )( x ) = f ( g ( x ) ) = f ( x ).

3 x = 12

Add 12 to both sides.

Before simplifying:

x = 4

Divide both sides by 3.

( f  g)( x ) = ( x ) 2 , x ≥ 0.
The domain of f is ( −∞, ∞ ),
and ( f  g)( x ) is defined on
[ 0, ∞ ) .
After simplifying:
( f  g ) ( x ) = x.
Here it appears that the domain
of f  g is ( −∞, ∞ ). However,
this is not correct; it is [ 0, ∞ ).

1
is defined if x ≠ 4. The domain of f  g is ( −∞, 4 ) ∪ ( 4, ∞ ).
3 x − 12

So f ( g ( x ) ) =

Practice Problem 6. Let f ( x ) =
EXAMPLE 7

x and g ( x ) = 3 − x . Find the domain of f  g.

Finding the Domain of Composite Functions

Let f ( x ) = x − 2 and g ( x ) = 4 − x . Find the following functions and their
domains, using the procedure given in Example 5.
a. f  g  b. g  f
Solution
a. 1. g ( x ) =

4 − x is defined if 4 − x ≥ 0 or x ≤ 4. So A = ( −∞, 4 ].

2. f ( g ( x ) ) =

g( x ) − 2

Replace x with g ( x ) in f ( x ) =

x − 2.

So, g ( x ) is in the domain of f if:
g( x ) − 2 ≥ 0
g( x ) ≥ 2
4−x ≥ 2
4−x ≥ 4
−x ≥ 0
x ≤ 0.

Add 2 to both sides.
Replace g ( x ) with 4 − x .
Square both sides.
Subtract 4 from both sides.
A:
Solve for x.

So B = ( −∞, 0 ].
3. A ∩ B = ( −∞, 4 ] ∩ ( −∞, 0 ]
= ( −∞, 0 ]
See figure.

4

B:
0
A ù B:
0

So, the domain of f  g is ( −∞, 0 ].

A ù B 5 (2`, 0]

b. To find the domain of g  f , we interchange the role of g and f.
1. f ( x ) = x − 2 is defined if x − 2 ≥ 0 or x ≥ 2. So A = [ 2, ∞ ).
2. g ( f ( x ) ) = 4 − f ( x )
Replace x with f ( x ) in g ( x ) = 4 − x .
So, f ( x ) is in the domain of g if:
4 − f (x) ≥ 0
4 ≥ f (x)
f (x) ≤ 4

Add f ( x ) to both sides.
Rewrite.

x−2 ≤ 4
Replace f ( x ) with x − 2.
x − 2 ≤ 16
Square both sides (if 0 < a ≤ b then a 2 ≤ b 2 ).
x ≤ 18.
Solve for x.
A:
So B = ( −∞, 18 ].
2
3. A ∩ B = [ 2, ∞ ) ∩ ( −∞, 18 ]
= [ 2, 18 ]

B:
18

See figure.
A ù B:

So, the domain of g  f = [ 2, 18 ] .

2

18
A ù B 5 [2, 18]

Section 2.8 Combining Functions; Composite Functions

Practice Problem 7. Let f ( x ) =
each of the following functions.
a. f  g   b. g  f 

x − 1 and g ( x ) =

281

4 − x 2 . Find the domain of

Decomposition of a Function

Objective 4

In the composition of two functions, we combine two functions and create a new function.
However, sometimes it is more useful to use the concept of composition to decompose a
function into simpler functions. For example, consider the function H ( x ) = x 2 − 2. A
way to write H ( x ) as the composition of two functions is to let f ( x ) = x and
g ( x ) = x 2 − 2 so that f ( g ( x ) ) = f ( x 2 − 2 ) = x 2 − 2 = H ( x ).
A function may be decomposed into simpler functions in several different ways by
choosing various “inner” functions.

PROCEDURE IN ACTION
EXAMPLE 8

Decomposing a Function

Objective

Example

Write a function H as a composite of simpler functions
f and g so that H = f  g .

Write

Step 1 Define g ( x ) as any expression in the defining
equation for H that contains every occurrence of the
variable x.
Step 2 To get f ( x ) from the defining equation for
H, (a) replace the letter H with f and (b) replace the
expression chosen for g ( x ) with x.

H(x) =

2x 2 + 1
as f  g for some functions f and g.
1. Let g ( x ) = 2 x 2 + 1.
1
2x 2 + 1

2. H ( x ) =
becomes

1
.
f (x) =
x
Step 3

Now we have
H ( x ) = f ( g( x ))
= ( f  g )( x ).

1

Replace the expression
2 x 2 + 1 from Step 1 with
x and replace H with f .

3. f ( g ( x ) ) = f ( 2 x 2 + 1 )
1
2x 2 + 1
= H( x)

f ( x)=

1
, g( x ) = 2x 2 + 1
x

=

Note: Other choices include g ( x ) = 2 x 2 and
1
.
f ( x)=
x +1
Practice Problem 8. Repeat Example 8, letting g ( x ) =
write H ( x ) = ( f  g )( x ).

Objective 5

2 x 2 + 1. Find f ( x ) and

Applications of Composite Functions
EXAMPLE 9

Calculating the Area of an Oil Spill from a Tanker

Suppose oil spills from a tanker into the Pacific Ocean and the area of the spill is a perfect
circle. The radius of this oil slick increases at the rate of 2 miles per hour.
a. Express the area of the oil slick as a function of time.
b. Calculate the area covered by the oil slick in six hours.

282

Chapter 2 Graphs and Functions

Solution
The area A of the oil slick is a function of its radius r.
A = f ( r ) = πr 2
The radius is a function of time. We know that r increases at the rate of 2 miles per hour. So
in t hours, the radius r of the oil slick is given by the function
r = g ( t ) = 2t.

Distance = Rate × Time

a. Therefore, the area A of the oil slick is a function of the radius, which is itself a function of time. It is a composite function given by
A = f ( g ( t ) ) = f ( 2t ) = π ( 2t ) 2
= 4 πt 2 .
b. Substitute t = 6 into A to find the area covered by the oil in six hours.
A = 4 π ( 6 ) 2 = 4 π ( 36 )
= 144 π ≈ 452 square miles
Practice Problem 9. What would the result of Example 9 be if the radius of the oil slick
increased at a rate of 3 miles per hour?
EXAMPLE 10

Applying Composition to Sales

A car dealer offers an 8% discount off the manufacturer’s suggested retail price (MSRP) of
x dollars for any new car on his lot. At the same time, the manufacturer offers a $4000
rebate for each purchase of a new car.
a. Write a function r ( x ) that represents the price after only the rebate.
b. Write a function d ( x ) that represents the price after only the dealer’s discount.
c. Write the functions ( r  d )( x ) and ( d  r )( x ). What do they represent?
d. Calculate ( d  r )( x ) − ( r  d )( x ). Interpret this expression.
Solution
a. The MSRP is x dollars, and the manufacturer’s rebate is $4000 for each car; so
r ( x ) = x − 4000
represents the price of a car after the rebate.
b. The dealer’s discount is 8% of x, or 0.08 x; therefore,
d ( x ) = x − 0.08 x = 0.92 x
represents the price of the car after the dealer’s discount.
c. (i) ( r  d )( x ) = r ( d ( x ) )
Apply the dealer's discount first.
= r ( 0.92 x )

d ( x ) = 0.92 x

= 0.92 x − 4000

Evaluate r ( 0.92 x ) using r ( x ) = x − 4000.

Then ( r  d )( x ) = 0.92 x − 4000 represents the price of a car when the dealer’s
discount is applied first and then the manufacturer’s rebate is applied.
(ii) ( d  r )( x ) = d ( r ( x ) )

Apply the manufacturer’s rebate first.

= d ( x − 4000 )

r ( x ) = x − 4000

= 0.92( x − 4000 )

Evaluate d ( x − 4000 ) using d ( x ) = 0.92 x.

= 0.92 x − 3680
Thus, ( d  r )( x ) = 0.92 x − 3680 represents the price of a car when the manufacturer’s rebate is applied first and then the dealer’s discount is applied.

Section 2.8 Combining Functions; Composite Functions

d. ( d  r )( x ) − ( r  d )( x ) = ( 0.92 x − 3680 ) − ( 0.92 x − 4000 )

283

Subtract function
values.

= $320
This equation shows that any car, regardless of its price, will cost $320 more if you
apply the rebate first and then the discount.
Practice Problem 10. Repeat Example 10 if the dealer offers a 6% discount and the
manufacturer offers a $4500 rebate.

2.8

Exercises

Videos for
select exercises

Concepts and Vocabulary
1. ( fg )( x ) =
2. The domain of the function f + g consists of those values of
x that are
to the domains of f and g.
3. The composition of the function f with the function g is written
.
as f  g and is defined by f  g ( x ) =
4. The domain of the composite function f  g consists of
those values of x in the domain of g for which g ( x )
.

In Exercises 21–24, functions f and g are given. Find each of
the given values.
a. ( f + g )( −1 )		

b. ( f − g )( 0 )
f
c. ( fg )( 2 )		 d.  ( 1 )
g
21. f ( x ) = 2 x; g ( x ) = −x

5. True or False. We always have f  g = g  f .

22. f ( x ) = 1 − x 2 ; g ( x ) = x + 1
1
23. f ( x ) =
; g( x ) = 2x + 1
x+2

6. True or False. If f ( 1 ) = 2 and g ( 2 ) = 1, then
( f  g )( 2 ) = 2.

24. f ( x ) =

f
7. True or False. The domain of fg and the domain of are
g
always the same.
8. True or False. A function may be decomposed into simpler
functions in several different ways.

a. f + g    b. f − g    c. fg

f(x)
4
3
2
1

26. f ( x ) = 2 x − 1; g ( x ) = x 2
27. f ( x ) = x 3 − 1; g ( x ) = 2 x 2 + 5

g(x)
4
3
2
1
1 2 3 4 x

24

22 21
21
22
23

  

9. ( f + g )( −2 )

10. ( f + g )( 2 )

11. ( f − g )( 4 )

12. ( f − g )( −1 )

13. ( fg )( −1 )

14. ( fg )( 2 )

f
15.  ( −2 )
g

f
16.  ( 2 )
g

17. ( f  g )( 1 )

18. ( g  f )( 1 )

19. ( f  g )( −3 )

20. ( g  f )( −3 )

f
g
      e.
g
f

25. f ( x ) = x − 3; g ( x ) = x 2

In Exercises 9–20, use the graphs of f and g shown in the
figure to evaluate each expression.

24 23 22 21
21
22
23
24

In Exercises 25–38, functions f and g are given. Find each of
the following functions and state its domain.

d.

Building Skills

x
; g( x ) = 3 − x
x 2 − 6x + 8

28. f ( x ) = x 2 − 4; g ( x ) = x 2 − 6 x + 8
29. f ( x ) = 2 x − 1; g ( x ) =
30.
1 2

4 x

f (x) =

x − 1; g ( x ) =

31. f ( x ) = x − 6; g ( x ) =
32.

f (x) =

x + 2; g ( x ) =

x
x
x−3
1− x

2
1
33. f ( x ) = 1 −
; g( x ) =
x+1
x
34. f ( x ) = 1 −

1 ( )
1
; g x =
x
x

35. f ( x ) =

2
x
; g( x ) =
x+1
x+1

36. f ( x ) =

5x − 1 ( )
4 x + 10
; g x =
x+1
x+1

37. f ( x ) =

x2
2x
; g( x ) = 2
x+1
x −1

38. f ( x ) =

x−3
x−3
; g( x ) = 2
x 2 − 25
x + 9 x + 20

284

Chapter 2 Graphs and Functions

In Exercises 39–42, find the domain of each function.
f
a. fg     b.
g
39.

f (x) =

40.

f (x) =

41.

f (x) =

42. f ( x ) =

x − 1;

g( x ) =

70. f ( x ) = 2 x − 3; g ( x ) = 2 x 2
71. f ( x ) = 2 x 2 + 3 x ; g ( x ) = 2 x − 1
72. f ( x ) = x 2 + 3 x ; g ( x ) = 2 x

5−x

73. f ( x ) = x 2 ; g ( x ) =

x − 2;

g( x ) =

x+2

x + 2;

g( x ) =

9 − x2

74. f ( x ) = x 2 + 2 x ; g ( x ) = x + 2
1
1
75. f ( x ) =
; g( x ) = 2
2x − 1
x
x
76. f ( x ) = x − 1; g ( x ) =
x+1
77. f ( x ) = x − 1; g ( x ) = 4 − x

x 2 − 4; g ( x ) =

25 − x 2

In Exercises 43 and 44, use each diagram to evaluate
( g  f )( x ) . Then evaluate ( g  f )( 2 ) and ( g  f )( −3 ) .

43.

x

44.

x

78. f ( x ) = x 2 − 4; g ( x ) =

1− x ( )
x+3
; g x =
x+2
x−4

80. f ( x ) =

x+2 ( )
x+1
; g x =
x−3
x −1

In Exercises 81–90, express the given function H as a composition of two functions f and g such that H ( x ) = ( f  g )( x ) .
81. H ( x ) = x + 2
82. H ( x ) = 3 x + 2
83. H ( x ) = ( x 2 − 3 )10

47. ( f  g )( −3 )

87. H ( x ) = 3 x 2 − 7

48. ( g  f )( −5 )
1
50. ( g  f )
2

( )

49. ( f  g )( 0 ) −5
51. ( f  g )( −c )

52. ( f  g )( c )

53. ( g  f )( a )

54. ( g  f )( −a )

55. ( f  f )( 1 )

56. ( g  g )( −1 )

In Exercises 57–66, the functions f and g are given. Find f  g
and its domain.
1
57. f ( x ) = , g ( x ) = 10 − 5 x
x

59. f ( x ) =

4 − x2

79. f ( x ) =

In Exercises 45–56, let f ( x ) = 2 x + 1 and g( x ) = 2 x 2 − 3.
Evaluate each expression.
45. ( f  g )( 2 )
46. ( g  f )( 2 )

58. f ( x ) =

x

1 ( )
, g x =
x

x

x , g( x ) = 2x − 8

60. f ( x ) =

x , g ( x ) = −x
2
1
61. f ( x ) =
; g( x ) =
x+1
x
62. f ( x ) =

1
2
; g( x ) =
x −1
x+3

63. f ( x ) =

x − 3; g ( x ) = 2 − 3 x

x
; g( x ) = 2 + 5x
x −1
65. f ( x ) = x ; g ( x ) = x 2 − 1
64. f ( x ) =

66. f ( x ) = 3 x − 2; g ( x ) = x − 1
In Exercises 67–80, the functions f and g are given. Find each
composite function and describe its domain.
a. f  g   b. g  f    c. f  f    d. g  g
67. f ( x ) = 2 x − 3; g ( x ) = x + 4
68. f ( x ) = x − 3; g ( x ) = 3 x − 5
69. f ( x ) = 1 − 2 x; g ( x ) = 1 + x 2

85. H ( x ) =

89. H ( x ) =

1
3x − 5
1
x3 − 1

84. H ( x ) =

3x 2 + 5
5
86. H ( x ) =
2x + 3
88. H ( x ) = 4 x 2 + x + 1
90. H ( x ) = 3 1 +

x

Applying the Concepts
91. Cost, revenue, and profit. A retailer purchases x shirts
from a wholesaler at a price of $12 per shirt. The selling price
for each shirt is $22. The state has 7% sales tax. Interpret
each of the following functions.
a. f ( x ) = 12 x
b. g ( x ) = 22 x
c. h ( x ) = g ( x ) + 0.07 g ( x )
d. P ( x ) = g ( x ) − f ( x )
92. Cost, revenue, and profit. The demand equation for a
product is given by x = 5000 − 5 p, where x is the number
of units produced and sold at price p (in dollars) per unit. The
cost (in dollars) of producing x units is given by
C ( x ) = 4 x + 12, 000. Express each of the following as a
function of price.
a. Cost
b. Revenue
c. Profit
93. Cost and revenue. A manufacturer of radios estimates that
his daily cost of producing x radios is given by the equation
C = 350 + 5 x. The equation R = 25 x represents the
revenue in dollars from selling x radios.
a. Write and simplify the profit function
P ( x ) = R ( x ) − C ( x ).
b. Find P ( 20 ). What does the number P ( 20 ) represent?
c. How many radios should the manufacturer produce and
sell to have a daily profit of $500?
d. Find the composite function ( R  x )( C ). What does
this function represent? [Hint: To find x ( C ), solve
C = 350 + 5 x for x.]

Section 2.8 Combining Functions; Composite Functions
94. Mail order. You order merchandise worth x dollars from
D-Bay Manufacturers. The company charges you sales tax of
4% of the purchase price plus shipping and handling fees of
$3 plus 2% of the after-tax purchase price.
a. Write a function g ( x ) that represents the sales tax.
b. What does the function h ( x ) = x + g ( x ) represent?
c. Write a function f ( x ) that represents the shipping and
handling fees.
d. What does the function T ( x ) = h ( x ) + f ( x ) represent?
95. Consumer issues. You work in a department store in which
employees are entitled to a 30% discount on their purchases.
You also have a coupon worth $5 off any item.
a. Write a function f ( x ) that models discounting an item
by 30%.
b. Write a function g ( x ) that models applying the coupon.
c. Use a composition of your two functions from a and b to
model your cost for an item, assuming that the clerk applies
the discount first and then the coupon.
d. Use a composition of your two functions from a and b to
model your cost for an item, assuming that the clerk applies
the coupon first and then the discount.
e. Use the composite functions from c and d to find how
much more an item costs, assuming that the clerk applies
the coupon first.

b. Let g ( x ) = x − 8000. What does this mean?
c. Which composite function, ( f  g )( x ) or ( g  f )( x ),
represents Henrita’s bonus?
d. What was Henrita’s salary for the week in which her sales
were $17,500?
e. What were Henrita’s sales for the week in which her salary
was $521?
99. Enhancing a fountain. A circular fountain has a radius of
x feet. A circular fence is installed around the fountain at a
distance of 30 feet from its edge.
a. Write the function f ( x ) that represents the area of the
fountain.
b. Write the function g ( x ) that represents the entire area
enclosed by the fence.
c. What area does the function g ( x ) − f ( x ) represent?
d. The cost of the fence was $4200, installed at the rate of
$10.50 per running foot (per perimeter foot). You are to
prepare an estimate for paving the area between the fence
and the fountain at $1.75 per square foot. To the nearest
dollar, what should your estimate be?

96. Consumer issues. You work in a department store in which
employees are entitled to a 20% discount on their purchases.
In addition, the store is offering a 10% discount on all items.
a. Write a function f ( x ) that models discounting an item
by 20%.
b. Write a function g ( x ) that models discounting an item
by 10%.
c. Use a composition of your two functions from a and
b to model taking the 20% discount first.
d. Use a composition of your two functions from a and
b to model taking the 10% discount first.
e. Use the composite functions from c and d to decide which
discount you would prefer to take first.
97. Test grades. Professor Harsh gave a test to his college algebra class, and nobody got more than 80 points (out of 100) on
the test. One problem worth 8 points had insufficient data, so
nobody could solve that problem. The professor adjusted the
grades for the class by (a) increasing everyone’s score by
10% and (b) giving everyone 8 bonus points. Let x represent
the original score of a student.
a. Write statements (a) and (b) as functions f ( x ) and g ( x ),
respectively.
b. Find ( f  g )( x ) and explain what it means.
c. Find ( g  f )( x ) and explain what it means.
d. Evaluate ( f  g )( 70 ) and ( g  f )( 70 ).
e. Does ( f  g )( x ) = ( g  f )( x )?
f. Suppose a score of 90 or better results in an A. What is
the lowest original score that will result in an A if the
professor uses
(i) ( f  g )( x )?

  (ii) ( g  f )( x )?

98. Sales commissions. Henrita works as a salesperson in a department store. Her weekly salary is $200 plus a 3% bonus on weekly
sales over $8000. Suppose her sales in a week are x dollars.
a. Let f ( x ) = 0.03 x. What does this mean?

285

30

x

100. Running track design. An outdoor running track with
semicircular ends and parallel sides is constructed. The
length of each straight portion of the sides is 180 meters.
The track has a uniform width of 4 meters throughout. The
inner radius of each semicircular end is x meters.
a. Write the function f ( x ) that represents the area enclosed
within the outer edge of the running track.
b. Write the function g ( x ) that represents the area of the
field enclosed within the inner edge of the running
track.
c. What does the function f ( x ) − g ( x ) represent?
d. Suppose the inner perimeter of the track is 900 meters.
(i) Find the area of the track.
(ii) Find the outer perimeter of the track.

4

x

180

101. Area of a disk. The area A of a circular disk of radius r
units is given by A = f ( r ) = πr 2 . Suppose a metal disk
is being heated and its radius r is increasing according to
the equation r = g ( t ) = 2t + 1, where t is time in hours.
a. Find ( f  g )( t ).

286

Chapter 2 Graphs and Functions
b. Determine A as a function of time.
c. Compare parts a and b.

102. Volume of a balloon. The volume V of a spherical balloon of radius r inches is given by the formula
4
V = f (r ) =
πr 3 . Suppose the balloon is being inflated
3
and its radius is increasing at the rate of 2 inches per second. That is, r = g ( t ) = 2t , where t is time in seconds.
a. Find ( f  g )( t ).
b. Determine V as a function of time.
c. Compare parts a and b.

Beyond the Basics
103. Let f = {( −2, 3 ), ( 1, 2 ), ( 2, 1), ( 3, 0 ) };
g = {( −2, 0 ), ( 0, 2 ), ( 1, −2 ), ( 3, 2 ) }.
Find each function.
f
a. f + g   b. fg   c.
  d. f  g
g
104. Let
 2 x
if −2 ≤ x ≤ 1
;
f ( x ) = 
1< x ≤ 3
 x + 1 if

 x + 1 if −3 ≤ x ≤ 2
.
g ( x ) = 
2 ≤ x ≤ 3
 2 x − 1 if

Find f + g and its domain.
105. Let h ( x ) be any function whose domain contains −x
whenever it contains x. Show that
a. f ( x ) = h ( x ) + h ( −x ) is an even function.
b. g ( x ) = h ( x ) − h ( −x ) is an odd function.
c. h ( x ) can always be expressed as the sum of an even
function and an odd function.
106. Use Exercise 105 to write each of the following functions
as the sum of an even function and an odd function.
a. h ( x ) = x 2 − 2 x + 3
b. h ( x ) =  x  + x

GETTING READY

107. Find the domain of f ( x ) =

1− x
.
2− x

 −1
if −2 ≤ x ≤ 0
.
108. Let f ( x ) = 
0 < x ≤ 2
 x − 1 if

Find g ( x ) = f ( x ) + f ( x ) .

Critical Thinking / Discussion / Writing

1
and g ( x ) = x ( 2 − x ). Find the domain
 x
of each of the following functions.
a. f ( x )
b. g ( x )
f (x)
c. f ( x ) + g ( x )
d.
g( x )

109. Let f ( x ) =

110. For each of the following functions, find the domain of f  f .
1
1
a. f ( x ) =
  b. f ( x ) =
−x
1− x
111. Even and odd functions. State whether each of the
following functions is an odd function, an even function,
or neither. Justify your statement.
a. The sum of two even functions
b. The sum of two odd functions
c. The sum of an even function and an odd function
d. The product of two even functions
e. The product of two odd functions
f. The product of an even function and an odd function
112. Even and odd functions. State whether the composite
function f  g is an odd function, an even function, or
neither in the following situations.
a. f and g are odd functions.
b. f and g are even functions.
c. f is odd, and g is even.
d. f is even, and g is odd.

for the Next Section

REVIEW CONCEPTS
Vertical-line test (Section 2.4, page 216)
Domain and range of a function (Section 2.4,
pages 210 and 215)
Composition of functions (Section 2.8, page 277)

Using the line of symmetry (Section 2.2, page 183)
GR2. Show that the line y = x is perpendicular bisector of
the line segment joining the points P = ( 2, 5 ) and
P ′ = ( 5, 2 ). (This shows that the points P and P ′
are reflections of each other about the line y = x.)

Solving linear and quadratic equations (Sections 1.1 and 1.3)

Solving linear and quadratic equations (Sections 1.1
and 1.3)
GR3. Solve the equation x = 2 y + 3 for y.

REVIEW SKILLS

GR4. Solve the equation x = y 2 + 1, y ≥ 0 for y.

Representations of functions (Section 2.4, page 211)
GR1. a. Does the relation R = {( −3, 2 ), ( −1, 1 ), ( 1, 3 ), ( 2, 1) }
define a function?

GR5. Solve the equation x 2 + y 2 = 4, x ≤ 0 for x.
1
GR6. Solve the equation 2 x − = 3 for y.
y

Line of symmetry (Section 2.2, page 182)

b. Construct a relation S by reversing the components of each
ordered pair in R. Does the relation S define a function?

Section 2.9 Inverse Functions

2.9

287

Inverse Functions
Objectives

Videos for
this Section

1

Define an inverse function.

2

Find the inverse function.

3

Use inverse functions to find the range of a function.

4

Apply inverse functions in the real world.

Water Pressure on Underwater Devices
The pressure at any depth in the ocean is
the pressure at sea level (1 atm) plus the
pressure due to the weight of the overlying
water: The deeper you go, the greater the
pressure. Pressure is a vital consideration in
the design of all tools and vehicles that
work beneath the water’s surface. Every
11 feet of depth increases the pressure by
approximately 5 pounds per square inch
(1 atmosphere ≈ 15 psi). Computing the
pressure precisely requires a somewhat
complicated equation that takes into
account the water’s salinity, temperature, and compressibility. However, a basic formula is
given by “pressure equals depth times 5, divided by 11 plus 15.” Thus, we have pressure
( psi ) = depth ( ft ) × 5( psi per atm )/11 ( ft per atm ) + 15, where psi means “pounds per
square inch” and atm abbreviates “atmosphere.”
For example, at 99 feet below the surface, the pressure is 60 psi. At 1 mile (5280 feet) below the
5280 × 5
+ 15 = 2415 psi. Suppose the pressure gauge on a diving bell
11
breaks and shows a reading of 1800 psi. We can determine the bell’s depth when the gauge failed
by using an inverse function. We will return to this problem in Example 9.

surface, the pressure is

Objective 1

Inverses
Before we define inverse functions, we need to look at a special type of function called a
one-to-one function.
One-to-One Function
• If different elements in the domain of f are assigned to different values, then the
function f is one-to-one. That is, if x 1 ≠ x 2 , then f ( x 1 ) ≠ f ( x 2 ).
• If there are two distinct elements in the domain of f that are assigned the same
value, then the function f is not one-to-one.

Let f be a one-to-one function. Then the preceding definition says that for any two
numbers x 1 and x 2 in the domain of f, if x 1 ≠ x 2 , then f ( x 1 ) ≠ f ( x 2 ), or equivalently, if
f ( x 1 ) = f ( x 2 ) then x 1 = x 2 . That is, f is a one-to-one function if different x-values
correspond to different y-values.

288

Chapter 2 Graphs and Functions
Domain

Range

Domain

Range

Domain

Range

x1

y1

x1

y1

x1

y1

y2

x2
x3
x4
x5

y5

One-to-one function: Each
y-value corresponds to only
one x-value.
(a)

y 5 f(x)
f(x1) 5 f(x2)

x1

x2

y3

x4

x3

y3
y4

x5

y4
x4

Not a one-to-one function: One
y-value, y2, corresponds to two
different x-values.
(b)

y5

Not a function: One x-value, x2,
corresponds to two different
y-values.
(c)

Figure 2.100 Deciding whether a diagram represents a function, a one-to-one
function, or neither

y

O

y2

x2

x3

y3
y4

y2

x2

x

Figure 2.101 The function f
is not one-to-one.

Figure 2.100(a) represents a one-to-one function, and Figure 2.100(b) represents a
function that is not one-to-one. The relation shown in Figure 2.100(c) is not a function.
Recall that with a one-to-one function, different x-values correspond to different
y-values. Consequently, if a function f is not one-to-one, then there are at least two numbers x 1 and x 2 in the domain of f such that x 1 ≠ x 2 and f ( x 1 ) = f ( x 2 ). Geometrically,
this means that the horizontal line passing through the two points ( x 1, f ( x 1 ) ) and
( x 2 , f ( x 2 ) ) contains these two points on the graph of f . See Figure 2.101. The geometric
interpretation of a one-to-one function is called the horizontal-line test.
Horizontal-Line Test
• If no horizontal line intersects the graph of the function more than once, then the
function is one-to-one.
• If some horizontal line intersects the graph of the function more than once, then
the function is not one-to-one.

EXAMPLE 1

Test for the One-to-One Property of a Function

Determine which of the following functions are one-to-one.
a. f ( x ) = 2 x + 5   b. g ( x ) = x 2 − 1   c. h ( x ) = 2 x

Solution
Algebraic Approach Let x 1 and x 2 be two numbers in the domain of each function.
a. Suppose f ( x 1 ) = f ( x 2 ). Then 2 x 1 + 5 = 2 x 2 + 5
2 x1 = 2 x 2

Subtract 5 from each side.

x1 = x 2 .

Divide both sides by 2.

So f ( x 1 ) = f ( x 2 ) implies x 1 = x 2 ; the function f is one-to-one.
b. Suppose g ( x 1 ) = g ( x 2 ). Then x 12 − 1 = x 22 − 1
x 12 = x 22
x1 = ± x 2 .

Add 1 to both sides.
Square-root property

This means that for two distinct numbers, x 1 and x 2 = −x 1, g ( x 1 ) = g ( x 2 ); so g is
not a one-to-one function.
c. Suppose h ( x 1 ) = h ( x 2 ). Then 2 x 1 = 2 x 2
x1 =

x2

x1 = x 2 .

Divide both sides by 2.
Square both sides.

So h ( x 1 ) = h ( x 2 ) implies x 1 = x 2 ; the function h is one-to-one.

